1 Mountain refuges Bunk down in some of
Central Europe’s most isolated and vista-rich
locations. See p.309
2 Dolomiti Superski With more than 1200km
of pistes and over 450 lifts connecting twelve
different ski areas, there’s a vast choice of slopes
for all levels. See p.309
3 Trento Surrounded by mountains, this
beautiful city combines Austro-Hungarian and
Renaissance architecture with a laidback vibe.
See p.310
4 Alpine lakes Enjoy the beauty of the region’s
spectacular Alpine lakes, such as Trentino’s Lago
di Toblino and Lago di Braies in Alto Adige.
See p.312 and p.335
5 Hiking in the Pale di San Martino One of
the most spectacular areas in the Dolomites, with
a great choice of high-altitude trails. See p.319
6 Ice Man The star exhibit at Bolzano’s Museo
Archeologico is the incredibly well preserved
“Ice Man”, discovered in the Ötzaler Alps in 1991.
See p.326
7 Wine tasting along the Strada del Vino
Follow the “Wine Road” through the Adige
Valley, sampling some of the region’s best food
and wine as you go. See p.329



Trentino-Alto Adige
Draped across the high Alps, where Italy, Austria and Switzerland collide and
their cultures blur, Italy’s northernmost region is a major draw for holidaymakers
who mostly come for winter skiing, summer hiking and tranquil
year-round vistas. However, in past times this region was far from today’s
peaceful vacation paradise; a string of castles along the Adige (Etsch) Valley
bear witness to the cut and thrust of medieval politics, and World War I saw
prolonged and ferocious fighting, with Italian and Austrian troops battling it
out in the harsh conditions of the Alpine ridges. Armies of brightly attired
skiers and sturdily booted hikers have long since replaced the troops,
invading the sunny slopes on ski and board or marching along one of the
hundreds of dramatic trails that crisscross the landscape.
As its double-barrelled name suggests, the region is made up of two areas: Trentino, the
southern part, is 98 percent Italian-speaking and the cuisine and architecture belong
predominantly to the south rather than the Alps. By contrast, the mountainous terrain
around Bolzano – known both as the Südtirol (South Tyrol) and Alto Adige – was only
annexed to Italy at the end of World War I (see box, p.324). Here, onion-domed
churches dot vineyards and forests, street signs are in German and Italian and the
landscape is redolent of illustrations from the Brothers Grimm. German is the
dominant tongue, though immigrants from Italy’s south rarely speak anything other
than Italian. Both Trentino and Alto Adige enjoy autonomy from central government,
along with one of the highest standards of living in Italy.
The region is dominated by the barren, jagged rock walls of the Dolomites. Some of the
most eye-catching peaks in Europe, these vast massifs have been eroded over the last 200
million years into a weird and wonderful array of needles, towers and pinnacles. In 2009
the range was added to the UNESCO World Natural Heritage List for their unique
geology – they began life around 250 million years ago as a giant coral reef beneath the
ancient Tethys Ocean – and for their diverse ecosystem, abundant in rare flora and fauna.
Numerous cable cars rise from the region’s small resorts enabling you to hike at 2000–
3000m, with a web of well-marked trails lasting from a gentle day-hike to a two-week trek.
Views of this spectacular landscape can also be savoured from the comfort of luxurious spa
hotels, with first-rate regional cuisine and a unique selection of treatments from bathing in
thermal water to “dry baths” involving lying swaddled in sheep’s wool or mountain hay.
Down in the valleys, Trentino-Alto Adige has a flourishing cultural scene, with
cutting-edge galleries and museums, such as Trento’s MUSE science museum and
Bolzano’s Museion gallery. The regional capital Trento has an atmospheric old centre
and an enviable quality of life, while Bolzano, Alto Adige’s chief town, makes an
engaging base for exploring the region, with its star attraction the famous “Ice Man”
(see p.326). Verdant hillsides planted with vineyards can be visited as part of the Strada
del Vino wine-tasting route, and the valley floor is carpeted with apple trees which
produce the principal ingredient for Südtirol’s delicious strudel.
Both Trento and Bolzano are transport hubs, reachable by train via Verona and
Innsbruck, and by bus from Bergamo and other airports. The scenic Great Dolomites
Road links Bolzano with Cortina d’Ampezzo. Merano, in the northwest, is another hub,
serving the Val Venosta (Vinschgau) and its side valleys which take you deep into the
mountains of the Parco Nazionale dello Stelvio, straddling the border with Lombardy.
GETTING AROUND TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
By bus Provincial bus companies stick to towns within
their province, so some places which look as though they
should be easy to get to from, Bolzano, say often are not. So
if using public transport, base your itinerary around
exploring one province at a time. Bikes can stored in the
boot of out-of-town buses on a first-come, first-served
basis (there is room for two bikes). Note that the
frequencies given here are for high season in summer, and
that buses are significantly less frequent on Sat, and rare on
Sun and public hols. For information on connections in
Trentino, visit Wttesercizio.it; in Alto Adige Wsii.bz.it.
Information on buses through the Dolomites around
Cortina is available at Wdolomitibus.it.
By train Train is definitely the best way to go between
Bolzano and Trento, served by frequent fast services, and to
larger towns north of Bolzano. Cyclists can stow bikes on
certain trains on the private Trento–Malè line (see p.312).
For online timetables, go to Wfsitaliane.it.
By car With scenic, steep ascents to high passes, erratic
Italian drivers and slow-moving tour buses, driving can be
nerve-racking and frustrating. The switchbacks and
bucking stretches of tarmac are also popular with
motorbikers, so watch those mirrors. Also note that many
passes remain closed until well after Easter: approach roads
have signs indicating whether the pass is open, or you can
call T0471 200 198 for information on road conditions.
The Südtirol’s official website, Wsouth-tirol.com, also has
winter road reports.
ACTIVITIES
HIKING
This section of the Italian Alps offers some exhilarating hiking,
often subject to snow, ice and scorching sun in the same day.
There are plenty of opportunities for day-walks in stunning
scenery that are within average capabilities, and routes are
well established and well signposted. Alternatively, consider
tackling one of the longer trails known as alte vie (literally
“high ways”). Four of these run north–south between the Val
Pusteria (Pustertal) and the Veneto; four from the Val d’Isarco
(Eisacktal) south; and two from Bolzano, with plenty of
mountain huts along the way for meals and overnight
accommodation. Some of the initial ascents are strenuous, but
once you are up on the ridges the paths level out and afford
stupendous views across the valleys and glaciers. Parts of the
trails are exposed, or have snowfields across them, but there
are usually detours you can take to avoid these. In Trentino two
well-planned circuits provide spectacular views, the Dolomiti
Panorama Trek (Wvisittrentino.it) and the Dolomiti Brenta
Trek (Wdolomitibrentatrek.it).
Guides Gillian Price’s Trekking in the Dolomites covers Alte
Vie 1 and 2; her Shorter Walks in the Dolomites outlines forty
day-walks of varying levels of difficulty. Italian or German
speakers should buy Alpina Verlag’s Dolomite Alte Vie/
Dolomiten Hohenwegel 1–10, a thorough companion to
each of the trails available from larger tourist offices.
Maps To plan your own routes through the Dolomites, the
Kompass 1:50,000 maps are on sale in every bookshop and
tourist office throughout the region: check which sheets
you’ll need at Wkompass.de. Paths are numbered and easy
to follow – just look out for the red-and-white blaze on
rocks and trees by the side of the path along the way.
Websites Wdolomiti.it is a good source of general
information on the area, while Wvisittrentino.it has details on
mountain refuges, transport, hiking, skiing and agriturismo
accommodation. Wmeteotrentino.it provides the latest on
snow conditions in Trentino from Dec onwards, or check the
national winter weather website Wmeteomont.net.



MOUNTAIN MEALS WITH A GERMAN SLANT  THE CUISINE OF
TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
Alto Adige cuisine has Germanic traditions, while Trentino cooking blends mountain influences
with Italian flavours. The hearty traditional food is great for refuelling after a day of hiking or skiing
and the quality of produce is exceptional, even in the simplest mountain hut. For finer dining,
adventurous chefs are reworking old recipes to fashion much lighter dishes, and it is well worth
trying out some of the pricier restaurants we list for a new take on local specialities.
A traditional meal starts with some kind of salami (lucaniche in local dialect), often paper-thin
slices of salt beef, or Tyrolean canederli – bread dumplings spiked with speck (smoked ham) often
served in broth (brodo). You’ll also see strangolapreti (bread and spinach gnocchi) and
schlutzkrapfen (spinach-filled pasta) on the menu. Fresh lake and river fish, game and rabbit are
popular as secondi, as are venison goulash or boiled cured pork with sauerkraut. Desserts are
often based on apples, pears or plums, readily available from the local orchards. Other sweet
treats include apfel strudel, sachertorte and kaiserschmarren, a scrambled pancake with raisins.
A highlight of the year for food- and wine-lovers is the autumn Törggelen season (see box,
p.330), when everyone heads for the hills to sample the new vintage and snack on mountain
ham and roast chestnuts, followed by a walk.
Vines have been cultivated here since before Roman times, and Trentino-Alto Adige produces
more DOC wines than any other region in Italy. Most famous are the Pinot Grigios and
Chardonnays, which are bright and aromatic from being grown at high altitudes and in cool
conditions. These also provide wine makers with the raw material for some outstanding
traditional-method sparkling wines, often marketed under the spumante Trentino Classico label.
Despite the excellence of the whites, including the aromatic slightly sweet Gewürztraminer,
local wine makers actually make more reds often with local varieties like Teroldego and Schiava
(known as Vernatsch in German-speaking areas). Red wines made from Schiava are good when
young: look out for the pale red Kalterersee (Caldaro) and the fuller, fruitier St Magdalene (Santa
Maddalena); those made from the Lagrein grape variety are more robust, such as the strong,
dark Lagrein Dunkel, or the Kretzer rosé from Bolzano’s vineyards at Gries. Also worth seeking
out is the rare vino santo (not to be confused with vin santo from Tuscany) from Trentino’s Valle
dei Laghi – a luscious dessert wine made from local Nosiola grapes.


FESTIVALS AND EVENTS
Wine-related festivities abound across the region, with almost every village celebrating its
vintages, harvest or related traditions – ask local tourist offices for details. The biggest wine
bash, the Festa in Vino takes place in the sixteen towns along the South Tyrolean Wine Road
from mid-May to mid-June, with tours, music, tastings and myriad other events. The month of
events comes to a climax with the Night of the Cellars when wine producers open their
doors on the final night: see Wsuedtiroler-weinstrasse.it for further details.
There are plenty of summer concerts, but possibly the best event is the Suoni delle
Dolomiti series of jazz, folk and world music concerts by artists from all over the world: the
concept is an original one – you hike (sometimes with the artists) to the chosen location,
which may be a wood, perhaps, or a rocky gully, then listen to the concert. Performances are in
the early afternoon and sometimes at dawn: Wisuonidelledolomiti.it has details of concerts,
local accommodation and walking times to venues. In the best Central European tradition,
vast Christmas markets take over the historic centres of Trento and Bolzano, as well as most
towns in the region: for details, see Wvisittrentino.it or Wchristkindlmarkt.it.


Trento
Overshadowed by Monte Bedone, just 13km away, TRENTO is beautifully situated,
encircled by mountains and exuding an easy-going pace of life. Visitors inevitably
gravitate to the central, café-lined Piazza del Duomo, all fading frescoes and
cobblestones, with fashionable shops, boutiques and restaurants occupying the
narrow streets that lead off it. Mammoth, moss-covered city walls lurk beyond.
Trento was known as Tridentum to the Romans, a name celebrated by the eighteenthcentury
Neptune fountain in the central Piazza Duomo. From the tenth to the
eighteenth centuries, the city was a powerful bishopric ruled by a dynasty of princes; it
was the venue of the Council of Trent between 1545 and 1563, when the Catholic
Church, threatened by the Reformation in northern Europe, met to plan its
counterattack. Later, throughout the nineteenth century, ownership of the city, which
remained in Austrian hands, was hotly contested, and it only became properly part of
Italy in 1919, following World War I.
The Duomo
Piazza Duomo • Duomo Daily 6.30am–noon & 2.30–8pm • Free • Crypt Mon–Sat 10am–noon & 2.30–5.30pm • €1.50
Started in the thirteenth century, but not completed until the sixteenth,
Trenta’s Duomo hosted the three most significant meetings of the Council of
Trent (see p.310). Inside, an enormous, carved marble baldachino, held over the
altar by four chunky Baroque barley-twist columns, is a replica of the one in
St Peter’s, Rome. However, by far the most interesting part of the building lies
beneath the cathedral, where a medieval crypt and foundations of an early Christian
basilica built over the tomb of St Vigilio, the third bishop of Trento, were
discovered in 1977.
Museo Diocesano Tridentino
Piazza Duomo 18 • April–Sept Wed–Mon 10am–1pm & 2–6pm; Oct–May Mon & Wed–Sat 9.30am–12.30pm & 2–5.30pm, Sun
10am–1pm & 2–6pm • €5 • Wmuseodiocesanotridentino.it
Next to the Duomo, the Museo Diocesano Tridentino, housed in the Palazzo Pretorio,
includes large annotated paintings of the sessions of the Council of Trent and some
carved altarpieces from the church of San Zeno in the Val di Non. The building is
appealing in itself, too, with its fishtail battlements, heavy studded doors and a view
from the upper storey of the frescoed palaces around the square.

311
5
TRENTO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
Castello del Buonconsiglio
Via Bernardo Clesio 5 • Tues–Sun: early May to Oct 10am–6pm; Nov to early May 9.30am–5pm • €8 • T0461 233 770, Wbuonconsiglio.it
The most powerful of the Trento princes was Bernardo Clesio, who in the late fifteenth
and early sixteenth centuries built up much of the city’s art collection, a good proportion
of which is held in the Castello del Buonconsiglio, another venue of the Council of
Trent. It’s really two castles: the thirteenth-century Castelvecchio and the extension built
in 1530 called the Magno Palazzo, in which several rooms frescoed with classical subjects
by the Dossi family and Romanino lead off an inner courtyard. Upstairs in the Museo
Provinciale d’Arte, the highlight is the Ciclo dei Mesi (Cycle of the Months), where
frescoes dating from 1391 to 1407 show scenes of farming and courtly life.
S.A.S.S.
Piazza Cesare Battisti • Tues–Sun: June–Sept 9.30am–1pm & 2–6pm; Oct–May 9am–1pm & 2–5.30pm • €2.50
During renovation work on Trento’s theatre in the 1990s, archeologists discovered
around 1700 square metres of a Roman road – complete with sewage system – along
with buildings and remains of the city walls dating from between 1000 BC and 400
AD. This is now the S.A.S.S. (Spazio Archeologico Sotterraneo del Sas), an
underground archeological area where you can see all the mosaics, buildings, courtyards
and artisans’ dwellings from the visitor centre, built on a level with the existing road.

MUSE
Corso del Lavoro e della Scienza 3 • Sept–June Tues–Fri 10am–6pm, Sat 10am–7pm; July Tues–Sun 10am–7pm; Aug daily 10am–7pm;
Wed year-round 10am–9pm • €10 • T0461 270 311, Wmuse.it
Spread over six floors, Trento’s Museo delle Scienze, or MUSE, is located in a futuristic
structure designed by architect Renzo Piano. The museum houses exhibitions on
Alpine ecosystems, with the top floors examining the highest peaks and glaciers and the
basement taking visitors below sea level. It is one of the region’s top draws, with
permanent exhibitions as well as temporary displays, and plenty of interactive exhibits.
Museo degli Usi e Costumi della Gente Trentina (MUCGT)
Via Mach 2, San Michele all’Adige • Tues–Sat 9am–12.30pm & 2.30–6pm • €6 • T0461 650 314, Wmuseosanmichele.it • Take the train
from Trento to Grumo San Michele, from where it’s a 10min walk
Some 15km northeast of Trento, the Museo degli Usi e Costumi della Gente Trentina
– or MUCGT – at San Michele All’Adige, gives a real flavour of what life in Trentino was
like until the twentieth century. One of the largest museums of its kind in Europe, it
has exhibits that range from re-creations of village houses (complete with muddy boots
drying by the stove) to displays on hunting, grazing and wine making.
Lago di Toblino
Take bus #201 from Trento to Padergnone (every 30min–2hr; 30min)
Seventeen kilometres west of Trento, the sixteenth-century Castel Toblino sits on a
verdant peninsula stretching out into the beautiful Lago di Toblino. The region’s
best-known lake fortress, it boasts a stunning location surrounded by mountains. There’s
an upmarket restaurant in the castle itself (T0461 864 036, Wcasteltoblino.com) and a
lovely cycle route around one side of the lake tracing the lakeside road.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION TRENTO
By train Trento’s main train station is on Piazza Dante. A
separate station belonging to the privately run Trento–Malè
railway for the Val di Non is on Via Dogana 2, just beyond the
train station (follow platform 1 for 100m heading north).
Destinations Bologna (8 daily; 2hr–3hr); Bolzano (every
20–30min; 30–50min); Bressanone (8 daily; 1hr 10min, or
change in Bolzano); Grumo San Michele (12 daily; 30min);
Malè (at least hourly; 1hr 30min); Rovereto (at least hourly;
15min); Venice (at least hourly; 2hr 30min–3hr); Verona (2
hourly; 1hr 20min).
By bus Trento makes a good base for exploring the
Dolomites, because of its bus services. The bus station is on
Via Pozzo, almost next door to the train station.
Destinations Canazei (4 daily; 2hr 45min); Madonna di
Campiglio (4 daily, more in winter; 2hr 8min); Molveno (4
daily, train and bus; change at Mezzolombardo; 1hr
30min); Predazzo (7 daily; 1hr 51min); San Martino di
Castrozza (4 daily, bus and train connection; 3hr); Vigo di
Fassa (4 daily; 2hr 20min).
Tourist office The tourist office at Via Manci 2 (daily
9am–7pm; T0461 216 000, Wdiscovertrento.it) sells the
useful TrentoRovereto Card (€20 for 48hr) and the Trentino
Guest Card (€40 for seven days), offering free city transport
and admission to many museums.
GETTING AROUND
By bike Trento’s cycle-path network is excellent and it’s
linked via the Valle dell Adige cycle path to Bolzano in the
north and Verona to the south, with many charming towns
and villages en route. You get free bike rental with a
TrentoRovereto Card or a Trentino Guest Card (see above).
By cable car A cable car runs from the San Lorenzo bridge,
near Trento’s bus station (every 15–30min until 10pm; €9),
to the lower slopes of the towering Monte Bondone, from
where you get a wonderful view.
Taxis Radiotaxi, Via Degasperi 27 (T0461 930 002).
ACCOMMODATION
Aquila d’Oro Via Belenzani 76 T0461 986 282,
Waquiladoro.it. Contemporary rooms occupy the six
storeys of an old pink townhouse a stone’s throw from the
Duomo. Every storey has a Junior Suite (each with a huge
bathroom and romantic sauna lit with a constellation of
tiny star-like lights; €250), a standard room (small
bathroom with bisazza-mosaic-walled showers) and a
generously proportioned single with a double bed. €150
313
5
ROVERETO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
B&B Al Cavour 34 Via Cavour 34 T349 415 5814,
Walcavour34.it. Run by an enthusiastic young couple, this
friendly B&B has splashes of colour in each room; breakfast
is served at a communal table, and includes home-made
cakes, ham, eggs and cheeses; there are bike storage
facilities too. €90
B&B Ca’ Bianca Via Gabbiolo 22 T348 820 8977,
Wcabiancatrento.it. Seven kilometres east of Trento, this
family-friendly B&B has just two rooms (one sleeping up to
four), and a gorgeous garden with kiwi fruit, strawberries,
figs, apples and pears. Breakfast includes home-made
jams, honey, yogurt, cold cuts and cheeses. €70
NH Trento Via Adalberto Libera T0461 366 111, Wnhhotels.
com. A stone’s throw from MUSE, this modern,
glass-fronted four-star hotel has light and airy rooms.
Facilities include parking, bike and ski storage and a small
gym. €182
Villa Madruzzo Via Ponte Alto 26 T0461 986 220,
Wvillamadruzzo.com. Set in the hills above Trento, this
peaceful four-star hotel has classic rooms with nineteenthcentury
furniture in the main historic villa, which is
connected by an underground passageway to an annexe
with stylish modern rooms. There’s a swimming pool and a
lovely garden area. €130
EATING, DRINKING AND NIGHTLIFE
You’ll eat well in Trento and the surrounding area, and foodies might consider a winter visit as, from late Nov until
Christmas, hundreds of food and craft stalls fill the streets to celebrate the feast of St Lucy. For some local wine tasting,
head to the cantine in the suburbs and villages around Trento, all marked on the tourist office map.
Ai Vicoli Piazza S. Verzeri 1 T0461 260 673. A lovely
setting on a tiny piazza close to the Duomo, this distinctive
place serves up dishes that skilfully combine tradition and
innovation. Primi €15, secondi €22. Mon–Sat
11.30am–2.30pm & 7–10.30pm.
Il Cappello Piazzetta B. Lunelli T0461 235 850,
Wosteriailcappello.it. A friendly osteria in the heart of
town serving local and Mediterranean dishes. There’s a
dining area with an open-plan kitchen on the ground floor,
while below is a candlelit vaulted basement; in summer
there’s seating outside. Tues–Sat noon–2pm & 7.30–
10pm, Sun noon–2pm.
Le Due Spade Via Don Arcangelo Rizzi 11 T0461 234
343, Wleduespade.com. The atmospheric woodpanelled
interior of this first-rate osteria is almost as much
a reason to come as the Michelin-starred food. The €30
lunch menu is a real bargain for this quality; otherwise the
menu is divided into “sea” (taster menu €65) and
“mountains” (taster menu €75). Primi €16, secondi €20.
Mon 7.30–10pm, Tues–Sat noon–2.pm & 7–10pm.
★Moki Via Malpaga 20 T0461 182 2401, Wmokitrento.
it. A laidback café and restaurant – grab a quick bite
at lunch or a slice of cake (€3.50), or opt for a main course
(€10) made with locally sourced ingredients. There’s a set
Sat brunch (noon–2.30pm; €18) usually featuring
pancakes, eggs and burgers. Art and photography
exhibitions are often held here. Mon 12.20–3pm, Tues–
Sat 12.20–2.30pm & 7.30–10pm.
★Scrigno del Duomo Piazza Duomo 29 T0461 220
030, Wscrignodelduomo.com. Elegant wine bar and topquality
restaurant with tables laid out on a terrace on the
main square, and more informal seating at the wine-bar
counter inside. There’s a casual bistro-style menu (primi
€13) as well as a more formal selection of dishes (taster
menu €65). The extensive wine list features over four
hundred labels. Daily 11am–3.30pm & 5–11.30pm.
DIRECTORY
Doctor Guardia Medica, Via Paolo Orsi 1 (T0461 904 298),
offers out-of-hours medical service Mon–Fri 8pm–8am
and from Sat 8am to Mon 8am.
Hospitals In an emergency, call T118. Casualty T0461 903
111 at the Ospedale Santa Chiara, Largo Medaglie d’Oro 9.
Markets There’s a food market in Piazza Vittoria (Mon–Sat
mornings); a weekly market in the historic centre (Thurs
mornings); and a flea market in Piazza Garzetti (second Sat
of month except Jan & Aug).
Pharmacies Dall’Armi, Piazza del Duomo 10; Alla
Madonna, Via Manci 42; S. Chiara, Via S. Croce 57.
Police Via Maccani 148 (T0461 889 111).
Post office Piazza A. Vittoria 20 (Mon–Fri
8.30am–6.30pm, Sat 8am–12.30pm; T0461 275 311).
Rovereto
Some 20km to the south of Trento and a mere 13km from Lago di Garda, ROVERETO
is a small picturesque town, with stylish palazzi containing university faculties which
give the town a youthful, lively atmosphere. Its main attraction is the outstanding
MART gallery, though it’s also home to the world’s largest ringing bell, at Colle di
Miravalle, which tolls a hundred times daily (at 9.30pm & at noon on Sun) to honour

the war dead. The bell is in a little park (daily 9am–7pm; June–Sept also 9–10pm; €3;
T0464 434 412, Wfondazioneoperacampana.it), where there are lovely views which
you can admire while listening to the bell toll.
MART
Corso Bettini 43 • Tues–Thurs, Sat & Sun 10am–6pm, Fri 10am–9pm • €11 • Wmart.trento.it
Designed by Mario Botta, MART (Museo di Arte Moderna e Contemporanea) hosts
world-class exhibitions and is one of Trentino’s unmissable experiences. The spectacular
building, with spacious galleries wrapped around a central circular atrium flooded with light,
is impressive enough even before you view the art inside. Skilfully curated, themed
exhibitions use works loaned from institutions and individuals around the world as well as
drawing on the gallery’s collection of 30,000 paintings, design pieces and sculptures by
names including Lichtenstein, Rauschenberg and Warhol (as well as lesser-known locals such
as Italian Futurist Fortunato Depero, Giorgio de Chirico and Giorgio Morandi). A smaller
nearby branch, the Casa d’Arte Futurista Depero (Via Portico 38; Tues–Sun 10am–6pm; €7)
displays Depero’s large cloth collages, tapestries, furniture and other design pieces.
Museo Storico Italiano della Guerra
Via Castelbarco 7 • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • €7 • T0464 438 100, Wmuseodellaguerra.it
Perched above town in Rovereto’s castle, the Museo Storico Italiano della Guerra is one
of Italy’s major museums dedicated to the Great War. It houses an extensive collection
of 5700 weapons and arms, 1300 uniforms mainly from the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, military vehicles, bombs, projectiles and flags, as well as 190 pieces of
artillery, some of which were used during World War II.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION ROVERETO
By train Rovereto’s train station is located at the southern
end of Corso Rosmini, with MART and the tourist office at
the northern end. Buses #1, #2, #3 and #4 run between
them, along Corso Rosmini.
Destinations Bolzano (at least hourly; 1hr); Trento (at least
hourly; 15min); Venice (at least hourly; 2–3hr, change in
Verona); Verona (2 hourly; 1hr).
Tourist office Piazza Rosmini 16 (Mon–Sat 9am–1pm &
2–6pm, Sun 10am–4pm; T0464 430 363, Wvisitrovereto
.it).
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING
Casa del Pittore Via Acquedotto 8 T0464 486 856,
Wcasadelpittore.it. This was formerly the house of a
painter (as its name suggests), whose works of art are
displayed in the entrance area. The rooms are furnished
with antiques purchased at flea markets over the years, and
there’s a pleasant garden and terrace. €88
Osteria del Pettirosso Corso Bettini 24 T0464 422
463, Wosteriadelpettirosso.it. Atmospheric restaurant
with seating in a cosy stone-vaulted basement; the menu
includes tasty local specialities including canederli
(dumplings made of bread soaked with milk; €8.50) and
home-made apple strudel (€4). There’s live jazz every
fortnight on Wed (Sept–May). Mon–Sat noon–2.30pm &
7.30–10pm.
The Dolomiti di Brenta
With their saw-toothed peaks and glaciers, the Dolomiti di Brenta, northwest of Trento,
have a rougher character than the better-known Dolomitic peaks to the east – and their
trails are far less well-trodden. While they are steep, few peaks rise above 3000m, and the
paths are easy to follow, though the walking is strenuous. Climbers come here for the
towers of Cima Tosa and Cima Brenta, accessible by vie ferrate – iron “ladders” knocked
into the rock (see p.315). If you are looking for easier strolls, Val Genova has a gentler
beauty, with a woodland path taking you past a number of waterfalls cascading down the
mountainside.
315
5
THE DOLOMITI DI BRENTA TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
The range is circled by a good but slow and winding road, the southern half of which
passes through the quiet lake resort of Molveno. The Trento-to-Madonna di Campiglio
road takes you past the frescoed churches and wooded valleys of the Valle Rendena before
arriving at Campiglio itself, the best base for skiing in the area, and a transport hub for
walkers and climbers. The northern half of the Brenta mountains is bounded by the Val
di Non and the Val di Sole, both served by the privately run Trento–Malè railway.
Pinzolo and the Val Genova
Buses from Trento to Madonna di Campiglio skirt Monte Bondone and wind their way
past a series of patchy hills and villages, past Lago di Toblino. From here, the road
continues west, turning into the Valle Rendena at Tione di Trento, where a more remote
landscape of pasture and forest begins. Two settlements worth jumping off the bus for are
the ski village of PINZOLO and CARISOLO, which lie just a couple of kilometres apart on
the main road, for their well-preserved sixteenth-century frescoes of the danse macabre.
Chiesa di San Vigilio
Pinzolo • July & Aug Tues, Thurs & Sat 9am–1pm; Mon, Wed, Fri & Sun 2.30–6.30pm; otherwise on request • Free T340 915 9270.
Simone Baschenis was one of a family of itinerant artists who decorated several small
churches in Trentino in the 1500s. Among them was Pinzolo’s Romanesque Chiesa di San
Vigilio. On the south facade, a band of skeletons playing trumpets and bagpipes
accompanies a procession representing the social order of the day – from emperors,
cardinals and finely dressed ladies to soldiers, beggars and even a cherubic toddler who has a
mini skeleton friend to remind him of his own mortality. Inside is a fine Annunciation from
the thirteenth century, attributed to the Tuscan school, and other works by Simone
Baschenis, among them the Life of San Vigilio, the young Bishop of Trento.
Chiesa di Santo Stefano
2km west of Carisolo • June & Sept Tues–Sun 10am–11.30am; July & Aug Tues–Sat 10am–11.30am & 3–5.30pm, Sun 10am–11.30am •
Free audioguides available in the church
Decorated by the same artists as the Chiesa di San Vigilio, the modest Chiesa di Santo
Stefano perches on a huge chunk of granite just off the road into the beautiful Val


VIE FERRATE
Vie ferrate (literally “iron ways”) are an Italian phenomenon, consisting of fixed metal ladders,
pegs and cables that climbers clip onto with karabiners, making otherwise difficult routes
accessible. Many vie ferrate began life in the late nineteenth century as mountaineering took
off as a sport in Europe; Alpini troops put others in place during World War I to help the
soldiers fighting in the mountains. In the decades since then, volunteers from local Club
Alpino Italiano groups have created many more.
Kompass maps show vie ferrate as a line of little black dots or crosses, so you can easily avoid
them – they are definitely not for beginners or vertigo-sufferers. To use them, you need to be
confident belaying and have the proper equipment (including helmet, ropes, two
self-locking karabiners and a chest- or seat-harness). Incidentally, it’s not advisable to climb a
via ferrata in a thunderstorm either, as it might just become one long lightning conductor.
Once you’ve done a few straightforward paths up in the mountains you may be inspired to
tackle some ferrate, and there are plenty of specialist guides who can show you the ropes
– though you’ll need to book at least a week ahead in high season. Guides charge by the hour, so
save money by getting a small group together. Many of the rifugi are run by mountain guides, or
you can enrol on a mountain skills course: both Trentino and Alto Adige provincial tourist offices
keep lists of guides and mountaineering schools. Alternatively, contact the Collegio Guide Alpine
del Trentino, Vicolo Galasso 19, Trento (T0461 981 207, Wguidealpinetrentino.it), an organization
for Alpine guides in Trentino: for Alto Adige, contact Verband der Südtiroler Berg- und Skiführer,
Weintraubengasse 9, Bolzano (T0471 976 357, Wguidealpine-altoadige.it).


Genova. Near the start of the valley you’ll see a sign pointing down a track to the church
which has more frescoes of the danse macabre by the Baschenis on an outside wall, and
others inside the spare, atmospheric interior depicting the legend of Charlemagne’s
passage through the Val di Campiglio on the way to his coronation in Rome.
Ponte Verde and the Cascata di Nardis
The Val Genova road out of Carisolo follows a cascading river up through woods to an
information point at Ponte Verde, 4km from Carisolo. Footpaths lead from here past
several waterfalls, spectacular in the spring melt and after rain, or in winter when they
are frozen solid and a glacial turquoise inside. Most impressive is the Cascata di Nardis,
a five-minute walk from Ponte Verde, where several channels spill down the granite
rock walls of the mountainside.
Ponte Maria, Malga Bedole and the Adamello glaciers
A 4.5km walk or bike ride from Cascata di Nardis will bring you to Ponte Maria (cars are
only allowed beyond this point before 9.30am or after 5.30pm), from where a shuttle bus
runs (July & Aug daily, every 30min) another 8.5km to Malga Bedole (1584m), a settlement
used by shepherds in summer. A two- to three-hour hike from there along trail 212 is Rifugio
Città di Trento (T0465 501 193; mid-June to mid-Sept & April; access in snowy weather is
from Passo Tonale by cable car) at 2480m, within reach of the Adamello glaciers.
Madonna di Campiglio
The major village in the Val Rendena is MADONNA DI CAMPIGLIO, an upmarket ski resort
70km from Trento known as “Campiglio” for short. This is where the Austro-Hungarian
aristocracy holidayed in the nineteenth century, although not much from that era remains
– what you see now is very much a twentieth-century resort, with hotel balconies groaning
under the weight of geraniums. Winter sports and a quiet summer hiking season are
Campiglio’s forte, and the climbing and walking in the Dolomiti di Brenta are superb.
Reaching the trailheads
The best way to approach the trailheads is by cable car from Carlo Magno, 3km north of
the village centre, to Groste (daily: mid-June to mid-Sept 8.30am–12.30pm & 2–5pm;
€11.70 one way, €17.20 return). If you’re not into hard trekking, an alternative is to take
the Cinque Laghi cable car (July & Aug daily 8.30am–12.50pm & 2–5.20pm; €8.30 one
way, €11 return) from the centre of the village west into the Presanella group. A scenic
two-and-a-half-hour route will take you via Lago Ritorto back down to the valley.

WALKING IN THE BRENTA MASSIF
From the GROSTE Pass (2437m) planning your own routes is easy enough if you have a decent
hiking map. Rifugio Graffer (T0465 441 358, Wgraffer.com; open year round) is a fifteen minute
walk from the cable-car terminus, at 2261m. Head out along trail 316 nearby, which crosses the
boulder-strewn slopes towards the Sella and Tuckett rifugi at 2272m (both T0465 441 226, Wsat
.tn.it; June 20–Sept 20). The latter is named after the most prodigious of nineteenth-century
climbers, Francis Fox Tuckett, who climbed in this range, opening up a difficult new route called
the Bochetta di Tuckett. As ice axes hadn’t been invented, he negotiated snowfields with a ladder
and alpenstock (long staff ), and carried joints of meat and wine for mountaintop breakfasts.
Trail 328 (becoming 318) starts just past the Sella and Tuckett refuges, bringing you (in about 4hr
from Groste) to Rifugio Brentei (T0465 441 244, Wrifugiobrentei.it; mid-June to mid-Sept), set at
2489m, midway between the Cima Brenta and Cima Tosa mountain peaks. If you stay overnight
here, next day, if you can cope with snowfields, you can extend your walk by trekking up to the
Bocca di Brenta and crossing over the ridge to meet trail 319 down to Molveno, or simply return to
Campiglio via trails 318 and 316 (3hr 30min).
317
5
EAST OF TRENTO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE

Molveno and Andalo
On the other side of the Brenta mountain range from Campiglio is the lakeside village of
MOLVENO, with the slightly smaller town of ANDALO 4km away by road or beautiful
wooded trail. Both are known for the quality of their wild mushrooms, and many Italians
come here to pick them, after buying a mushrooming licence (€5/day, €20/week) from the
local comune or the tourist office at Andalo (see below). Each year forty thousand or so
Italians suffer mushroom poisoning, so only pick them if you know what you are doing.
Parco Faunistico di Spormaggiore
July to mid-Sept daily 9.30am–6.30pm, late Sept daily 9.30am–1pm & 2.30–6.30pm; Oct Sat & Sun 9.30am–1pm & 2.30–6.30pm • €8 •
T0461 653 622, Wparcofaunistico.tn.it • Bus #611 (every 1–2hr; 30min) from Molveno
About 14km northeast of Molveno, the Parco Faunistico di Spormaggiore was founded in
1994 to educate visitors on the region’s native fauna, and to conserve some of the
endangered predators that used to live in the area. In the enclosed outdoor areas, you can
see brown bears, wolves, lynxes, foxes, wildcat, eagle owls and otters. The nearby Museo
Casa del Parco Orso (daily 9.30am–1pm & 2.30–6.30pm; free) in the village of
Spormaggiore is dedicated to the region’s bears and the Parco Naturale Adamello Brenta.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION DOLOMITI DI BRENTA
By bus Express bus services run from Madonna di Campiglio,
Pinzolo and Carisolo to Bedole once daily in the morning,
returning late afternoon. A dozen buses a day run from Trento
to Madonna di Campiglio’s main square (2hr), and there are
handily timed services that coincide with arrivals and
departures of the train (approx hourly) to Malè, 23km north.
Tourist offices Via Pradalago 4, Madonna di Campiglio
(daily 9am–1pm & 3–7pm; T0465 447 501,
Wcampigliodolomiti.it); and Piazza Dolomiti 1, Andalo
(July & Aug Mon–Sat 9am–12.30pm & 3.30–7pm, Sun
9.30am–12.30pm; Sept–June Mon–Sat 9am–12.30pm &
3–6.30pm, Sun 9.30am–12.30pm; T0461 585 836).
ACCOMMODATION
PINZOLO
★Casa al Campo Via Al Pont 4 T0465 500 290,
Wcasalcampo.com. A lovely agriturismo with pigs,
chickens, ducks and geese. Its eight cosy rooms have wooden
floors and there’s a pretty garden with deck chairs in summer.
You can sample its own hams and fresh garden produce at
the excellent restaurant. Rates are half board. €130
MADONNA DI CAMPIGLIO
Hotel Diana Via Cima Tosa 52 T0465 441 011,
Whoteldiana.net. An attractive four-star hotel in the
heart of Madonna di Campiglio right at the foot of the ski
runs (some rooms have excellent views over the resort’s
black run where championships are often held); rooms
have oak, spruce and Swiss pine fittings, and there’s a small
cellar for wine tasting sessions. €230
Maso Mistrin Viale Dolomiti di Brenta 93 T0465 507
293, Wmasomistrin.com. About 6km south of Madonna
di Campiglio, on the road to Carisolo, this pleasant hotel has
rooms named after flowers; interiors feature rustic wooden
fittings, and there are three apartments with kitchenettes.
There’s also a garden with table tennis in summer. €110
East of Trento
If soaring peaks get your pulse racing, a trip east of Trento to a group of stunningly bare
peaks called the Pale di San Martino is unmissable. Now 2000m above sea level, the
range was formed as a coral reef sixty million years ago – white shells crunch underfoot
as you walk, and the pale rock reflects light, even at dawn. The Pale are part of the
Parco Naturale Paneveggio, an area of gently rolling woods and summer pastures with
many walks, trails and campsites. The nearest resort is San Martino di Castrozza, the
terminus for buses travelling from Trento along the Valsugana and the Val di Fiemme.
Imer and Mezzano
The road from Trento to San Martino passes through the archetypal tourist villages of
IMER and, a couple of kilometres east, MEZZANO, dotted with beautiful woodcarving
sculptures made by the town’s inhabitants. The wide Val di Primiero, in which they’re
located, has hay meadows spreading either side, and makes a good place to walk or
cycle, with cycle tracks linking the villages and easy paths running into the foothills.
Fiera di Primiero
Around 3km beyond Mezzano, FIERA DI PRIMIERO is a large resort and market town.
It’s a major crossroads in the area, from where buses run up to the beginning of the Val
Canali and to Passo Cereda (1369m). The mountains around Fiera were worked for
silver, iron and copper from the thirteenth century, and miners’ guilds paid for the
town’s late-Gothic parish church near the fortified Palazzo delle Miniere (where the
precious metals were guarded before being sent to the mint). Inside the church is a
beautiful painting of The Hunt of the Mystic Unicorn and a fine fifteenth-century carved
altar showing scenes from the Virgin Mary’s life. Recent excavations have brought to
light the remains of a paleo-Christian basilica dating from the fifth to sixth centuries.
It’s well worth a stroll round the village – paintings made in the sixteenth century on
the outside of some of the older houses have survived the elements.
San Martino di Castrozza
The road into SAN MARTINO DI CASTROZZA twists and turns, and you feel like you’re in
the middle of nowhere until the resort’s new hotels appear. As far back as the Middle Ages,
travellers and pilgrims stopped here for the night, staying at the monastery, of which only
traces remain. Today, it’s one of the smarter Dolomite resorts, and visitors come here for
skiing and hiking – hourly buses south to Fiera di Primiero and Imer, and cable-car routes
into the mountains make San Martino one of the best walking bases in the area.
Parco Naturale Paneveggio
T0439 64 854, Wparcopan.org
Beyond San Martino, traffic files up to Passo di Rolle, a beautiful stretch of high moorland
dotted with avalanche breaks and a few sheep. There are only two buses a day, so a car really
helps here. The Passo di Rolle falls within the Parco Naturale Paneveggio, which protects a
vast area of ancient woodland as well as the high peaks of the Pale di San Martino, prime
hiking country. Crisscrossed by nature trails and ancient paved paths called reversi, the park
gives you a sense of rural life on the summer pastures and in the forest, and makes an
atmospheric venue for open-air concerts in the Suoni delle Dolomiti series (see p.310).
Predazzo
Out of the confines of the Parco Naturale Paneveggio, PREDAZZO is the first town you
come to in the Val di Fiemme, which lies between two immense mountain massifs: the
Latemar and the Catena di Lagorai. Predazzo has become something of a pilgrimage
site for geologists, owing to the extensive collection of local rocks and fossils in the
Museo Civico di Geologia next to the church at Piazza Santi Filippo e Giacomo 1
(July–Sept Mon–Sat 10am–noon & 5–7pm; T0462 500 366). Surprisingly accessible
to non-experts, the displays include samples of the Dolomitic calcite rock first
identified by the elaborately named French mineralogist Dieudonné Sylvain Guy
Tancrède de Gratet de Dolomieu.
Tesero
Between Predazzo and Cavalese, the only reason to stop at the village of TESERO is to
view the small but intriguing chapel next to the parish church. This is decorated with a
319
5
EAST OF TRENTO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
fresco called the Cristo della Domenica (“Christ of the Sabbath”) – around the Christ
figure are depictions of activities you mustn’t do on a Sunday and tools you mustn’t use.
Crossbow shooting, music playing and wood chopping are on the list and the fresco also
shows a couple in bed; apparently you aren’t supposed to do that on the Sabbath either. If
you just want to stop to view the fresco, there’s free parking outside the church.
Cavalese
Built around its colourful church tower and still sporting a cobbled main street, CAVALESE,
the chief town of the Val di Fiemme, makes for an engaging afternoon halt. In the centre of
Cavalese, the Palazzo della Magnifica Comunità, at Piazza Cesare Battisti 2 (July to mid-Sept
Wed–Mon 10am–noon & 3– 6.30pm; €5; T0462 340 812, Wpalazzomagnificaeu), is a
fabulously frescoed medieval palace that has been painstakingly restored. It was the Bishop
of Trento’s grand summer palace, and now houses a small museum and gallery containing
some original valley statutes, carefully kept in wood-panelled rooms, with fine wooden
ceilings and painted friezes. The building’s lack of fortifications indicates that Trento’s bishop
felt safe from the armed rebellions that had plagued him in the city, and its exterior is
covered in frescoes depicting St Vigilio (Trento’s patron saint).
INFORMATION EAST OF TRENTO
FIERA DI PRIMIERO
Tourist office Via Dante 6 (mid-June to mid-Sept & mid-
Dec to Easter Mon–Sat 9am–12.30pm & 3.30–6.30pm,
Sun 9.30am–12.30pm; rest of year Mon–Sat
8.30am–12.30pm & 3.20–6pm; T0439 62 407).
SAN MARTINO DI CASTROZZA
Tourist office Via Passo Rolle 165 (Mon–Sat
9am–12.30pm & 3.30–6.30pm, Sun 9.30am–12.30pm &
3.30–6.30pm; T0439 768 867, Wsanmartino.com).
PARCO NATURALE PANEVEGGIO
Visitor centres The park has three visitor centres: San
Martino, Via Laghetto (late June to early Sept daily
9am–12.30pm & 3.30–7pm; T0439 768 859); Casa del
Parco at Villa Welsperg, Val Castelpietra 2 in the Val
Canali (June–Sept daily 9am–12.30pm & 3–6pm; Oct–
Dec Mon–Fri 9.30am–12.30pm & 2–5pm; Jan–May
Mon–Sat 10am–12.30pm & 3–6pm; T0439 64 854);
and Terra Foresta, the main Paneveggio centre, which is
along the SS50 road from Predazzo up to the Passo Rolle
(9am–12.30pm & 2–5.30pm: early June to mid-Sept
daily; Christmas to March Tues & Fri; mid-April to early
June Sun only; T0462 576 283).
CAVALESE
Tourist office Via Fratelli Bronzetti 60 (Mon–Sat 9am–
noon & 3.30–7pm; mid-July & Aug also Sun 9am–noon;
T0462 241 111, Wvisitfiemme.it).
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING
MEZZANO
Camping Calavise Localita Pezze di Imèr 36 T0439 67
468, Wcampingcalavise.it. Well signposted from Imer,
this enjoyable campsite boasts a bar and swimming pool as
well as a wi-fi zone and live music in summer. Pitches
€9.50, plus €7.50 per adult
SAN MARTINO DI CASTROZZA
★Chalet Prà delle Nasse Via Cavallazza 24 T0439
768 893, Wristorante-da-anita.com. A lovely family-run
place with cosy wooden interiors and fires lit on the chilly
evenings; the spacious rooms all have balconies with views
of the surrounding countryside. The hearty breakfast
includes delicious home-made pies and cakes, along with
savoury dishes including speck and eggs, while the
restaurant serves excellent home-made meals. €110
PARCO NATURALE PANEVEGGIO
Cant del Gal Localita Val Canali 1, Tonadico T0439 62
997, Wcantdelgal.it. Opened in 1951, this hotel is the
perfect spot to relax after a long trek, with nine simply
furnished rooms, and free electric bikes for guests. Its
restaurant (open to non-residents) follows traditional
recipes using local products; the canederli with spinach and
herbs, and ricotta and nut gnocchi (both €8) are good,
while meat lovers can opt for the lamb (€10) or deer (€12)
ribs. Daily noon–2.30pm & 7–9pm; closed Nov & Tues in
April & May. €110
TESERO
Castelir Via Nazionale 57 T0462 810 001, Wcastelir
.it. About 2.5km east of Tesero, this lovely ecofriendly
hotel nestles among verdant meadows: its pinewood
rooms are spacious and inviting. There’s also an outdoor
heated pool that is great in winter when the ground is
covered in snow. €200
CAVALESE
Costa Salici Via Costa dei Salici 10 T0462 340 140,
Wcostasalici.com. A pleasant restaurant with pinewood
interiors serving great local and Italian dishes including
pappardelle or lasagne with deer bolognaise (€9); there’s an
attractive garden that gets lively on Thurs evenings at aperitivo
time. Tues 7–10pm, Wed–Sun 12.30–2pm & 7–10pm.
Laurino Via Antoniazzi 14 T0462 340 151,
Whotelgarnilaurino.com. Just off the main road through
town, this cosy seventeenth-century building has rooms
decorated in Tyrolean style with Alpine antiques and local
artwork. There’s an open-air hot tub, sauna and steam
room. €130

HIKING IN THE PALE DI SAN MARTINO
The most dramatic part of the Paneveggio national park is the Pale di San Martino – a large
plateau surrounded by razor-sharp peaks that range from 2600m to 3200m in altitude. You
should be prepared for snow, wind and rain, even in the summer, as well as scorching sunlight
and the most stupendous views. There are two main entry points – the Val Canali (accessed
from Fiera di Primiero) and the cable car from San Martino di Castrozza.
The Val Canali was described by Amelia Edwards in the nineteenth century as the most
“lonely, desolate and tremendous scene to be found this side of the Andes”. Things have
changed slightly since then with the arrival of the Alta Via 2 walking route which runs through
here, but the valley retains a feeling of isolation. Buses from Fiera di Primiero run to the
trailheads of the valley. Rifugio Treviso (T0439 62 311; late June to mid-Sept) is a possible
overnight stop, or there’s the more comfortable Cant del Gal (see p.320), further down the valley.
A stiff ascent from Rifugio Treviso brings you onto the Altopiano delle Pale at Passo di
Pradidali, where white partridges and stoats inhabit the barren plateau and the silence is broken
every so often by a trickle of falling stones. Once you are at this altitude, there are many
possibilities for linking up with other trails across the stark upland. Rifugio Pedrotti alla Rosetta
(T03470 498 929, Wrifugiorosetta.it; mid-June to Sept 20), at 2581m, is the nearest place with
accommodation (a 2hr 30min hike north; also reachable by cable car – see below). The fastest
route into the Pale di San Martino is via cable car from San Martino. The Colverde funicular (June
14–Sept 20 daily 8am–4.45pm; T0439 68 204) from the village runs to the foot of the Pale, from
where the Rosetta chair lift takes you up to the Rifugio Pedrotti alla Rosetta perched on the edge
of the Altopiano. From the Rosetta chair-lift terminus, you can make for Rifugio Pradidali at 2278m
(T0439 64 180, Wrifugiopradidali.com; June 20–Sept 20), a walk and descent of three hours. A
more ambitious walk would be to continue on from the refuge over the Passo di Ball, returning
from there to San Martino or descending over into Val Canali at the Cant del Gal.


The Catinaccio and Gruppo di Sella
The Catinaccio (or Rosengarten) range is one of the best-known sights in the Dolomites,
its unmistakeable bare-rock pinnacles appearing on brochures, guides and myriad
souvenirs. This immense wall of stone along the edge of the 3000m-high massif takes on a
famously rosy glow at sunset, and the mountain plays a lead role in the area’s best-known
myths and legends. Trails across this mountain are popular with mainly Italian and
German walkers and, although the zigzag paths to the peaks can be crowded in August,
once you’re above the cable-car line, there’s plenty of wilderness to lose yourself in.
Access is simple enough from Vigo di Fassa, the main place to stay in the Val di
Fassa, which splits off from the Val di Fiemme north of Predazzo at Moena. If you
travel these roads and trails, you pass through one of the heartlands of Ladino culture
(see box, p.322).
At the head of the Val di Fassa, Canazei makes a good springboard for the high
plateaux of the Gruppo di Sella, and the gentler trail of the Viel del Pan, which leads
down to the tiny resort of Arabba. On the northern side of the Sella group, Corvara is a
much larger resort with a sizeable Ladin population.

Catinaccio
The Catinaccio range was described by nineteenth-century writer Theodor
Christomannos as a “gigantic fortification … the gate into the kingdom of immortal
ghosts, of high-flying giants”. The area’s German name, Rosengarten (rose garden),
derives from the legend of Laurin, king of the dwarves, who used to grow roses here.
The king, angered when he was prevented from being with his beloved princess Similde,
put a spell on the roses so that no one would see them again by day or night, but forgot
to include dawn and dusk, which is when the low sun gives the rock its fiery glow.
The trails across the range cater for all levels of hiking ability; however, the going gets
tough on the ridges, from where you can see as far as the Stubaier Alps, on the border
with Austria. The most popular approach to Catinaccio is from the hamlet of Vigo di
Fassa, served by buses on the Trento–Canazei route. Once you’re above the tree line,
rifugi abound, serving hordes of summer walkers – if you’re looking for wilderness
trekking, you may want to go elsewhere.
Lago Carezza
Twelve kilometres west of Vigo di Fasso on the Bolzano road, stunning Lago Carezza
nestles amid thick forest, surrounded by jagged peaks. At an altitude of 1834m, its
crystal-clear waters are fed by underwater springs. There’s a viewing platform and a
path with benches from where you can soak in the wonderful views.
Canazei and around
CANAZEI, a buzzing summer and winter resort at the head of the Val di Fassa (Wfassa
.com) is a stepping stone to the stupendous high road passes between here and Cortina
d’Ampezzo. It’s also a good base for walking in the Gruppo di Sella or strolling along a
much easier trail – the Viel del Pan opposite glacier-topped Marmolada.
The road to the Passo Pordoi
With your own vehicle, it’s well worth driving the switchback road of 27 bends that
climbs for 12km out of Canazei towards the Passo Pordoi. Although it’s often busy with
LADIN COUNTRY
The Ladins (Ladini in Italian, Ladinisch in German) are a community of around thirty thousand
people living in the Gardena, Badia, Fassa, Livinallongo and Ampezzo valleys around the Sella
massif. They’re united by their ancient language – Ladin – which was once spoken over a wide
area, from Austria down to the River Po (in what’s now Emilia-Romagna). The Dolomitic Ladin
language, preserved by the relative remoteness of the territory, is linked to Swiss Romansch (there
are 40,000 speakers in the Swiss Engadine) and Friulano (more than forty thouasnd speakers in the
Friuli region of Italy).
The history of the Ladins is recorded in their epics, which recount tales of battles, treachery
and reversals of fortune. Around 400 AD, the Ladins were constantly threatened with invasion
by Germanic tribes from the north and others from the Po Valley. Christianity later emerged as
a major threat, but the Ladins absorbed and transformed the new religion, investing the new
saints with the powers of more ancient female divinities.
The Museo Ladin de Fascia, Strada de la Pieif 7 (mid-June to mid-Sept daily 10am–12.30pm &
3–7pm; mid-Sept to Oct & Dec to mid-June Tues–Sat 3–7pm; €5; Wistladin.net), between San
Giovanni and Vigo di Fassa, is devoted to traditional Ladin working life and provides a fascinating
introduction to Ladin culture, with intriguing exhibits on the language and history. It also has
exhibits scattered throughout the territory, including a restored nineteenth-century cooperage
(Botega da Pinter) at Via Dolomiti 3 in Moena; a restored watermill (Molin de Pezol) at Via Jumela 6
in Pera di Fassa; and a working, antique sawmill (La Sia) at Via Pian Trevisan in Penia, just outside
Canazei. Tourist offices throughout the area have details of festivals, exhibitions and events.
323
5
THE CATINACCIO AND GRUPPO DI SELLA TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
busloads of tourists heading for the scenic Great Dolomites Road and determined cyclists
making the 1000m ascent, the view when you get there is unforgettable.
Halfway along the road, the cable car at Pradel leads to Passo di Sella (2240m), one
of the most impressive of the Dolomite passes. Paths climb from here onto the jagged
peaks of the Sasso Lungo (Langkofel) and follow the ridges down onto the Alpe di
Siusi. Just past Pradel the road forks. Straight ahead is the Gruppo di Sella – an arid
lunar plateau surrounded by pink, dolomitic peaks. A right-hand turning takes you up
to the Passo Pordoi (2242m), an astonishing vantage point between the Gruppo di
Sella and Marmolada, from where mountains radiate in every direction. In the
foreground, the Sasso Lungo look like a jagged, gloved hand, flanked by two
prominent peaks; the Gruppo di Sella is squat and chunky; and Sciliar (Schlern), just
visible in the distance, comprises a flat rocky tabletop, culminating in two peaks. A
small road winds downwards to Passo Falzarego, and ultimately Cortina d’Ampezzo.
From the Passo Pordoi you can join Alta Via 2, or walk a short section of it known as
the Viel del Pan (see box, below). Most tourist buses and plenty of bikers stop at the
collection of cafés and stalls at the pass.
Corvara and around
The central town of the Ladin ethnic group, CORVARA is primarily a ski resort, and it
also makes a good base for the excellent trails of the nearby Fanes Park (see p.335), a
bus ride away, where most of the Ladin legends are based.
Some 4.5km north of Corvara is La Villa, a small village with a fairy-tale sixteenthcentury
castle.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION CATINACCIO AND GRUPPO DI SELLA
By bus Between mid-June and mid-Sept there are three
buses daily from Canazei to Passo Pordoi (35min). Buses
from Canazei run year-round to Corvara (1 daily; 1hr
20min), from where there are regular buses to Brunico
(hourly; 1hr), which is on the rail line into Austria.
Tourist office Strada Col Alt 36, Corvara (Mon–Sat 8am–
noon & 3–7pm, Sun 9am–noon & 4–6pm; T0471 836
176, Waltabadia.org).
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING
VIGO DI FASSA
★Agritur Agua Biencia Località Ramon T345 286
5410, Wagrituraguabiencia.it. This lovely agriturismo has
nine well-appointed rooms with rustic interiors. The garden
has beanbags and an open-air hot tub with stunning views of
the mountains, and there’s a small indoor pool and sauna.
There are cows, ducks, llamas and alpacas, and the agriturismo
produces its own yogurt and milk. €110
Il Chimpl da Tamion Hotel Gran Mugon, Strada de
Tamion 3 T0462 769 108, Whotelgranmugon.com.
Set in a quiet hamlet some 4km south of Vigo di Fassa, this
excellent Michelin-starred restaurant is in a friendly hotel
with simple rooms (€160 half board) in a peaceful setting.
The three-course set menu is very reasonably priced at €36,
though it is only open for dinner. Mon–Sat 8–9.45pm.
La Grotta Via Soraporta 8 T0462 764 047,
A WALK ALONG THE VIEL DEL PAN
If you’re not a great walker, this easy twenty-minute stroll from the Passo Pordoi provides a good
way to enjoy terrific Dolomite vistas. Pick up the Alta Via 2 trail just past the Albergo Savoia,
from where a narrow path traverses the mountainside opposite the glaciers of Marmolada.
During World War I, entire Austrian battalions overwintered inside Marmolada, which was right
on the frontline, by blasting 8km of tunnel tens of metres deep under the ice and rock.
From the seventeenth century this path was on the grain-smuggling route called the Viel
del Pan (“trail of bread” in Venetian dialect), and it remained busy enough in the nineteenth
century for the Guardia di Finanza to set up armed patrols along it. The contrast between the
glacier on Marmolada and the peaks of the Sella group is superb. The easiest option is to
return the same way to the Passo Pordoi, or you can continue on the same path to Lago
Fedaia, from where irregular buses in summer run back to Canazei.
Whotellagrotta.it. This family-friendly hotel is hugely
popular and rightly so – the quirky themed rooms, such as
the Suite Civetta (Owl Suite) and Suite Scoiattolo (Squirrel
Suite) feature rustic treehouse beds and murals depicting
fairy-tale scenes, and there’s an excellent kids’ club with
weekly excursions. Rates are half-board only. €300
CANAZEI
Enoteca Valentini Streda do Ruf de Antermont 6
T0462 601 134, Wenotecavalentini.com. Run by a
family of sommeliers, this wine bar and deli is a great spot
to stock up on excellent local wines and produce – it’s jampacked
with local foodstuffs including home-made jams,
polenta, speck and dried mushrooms. In winter enjoy a
glass of wine (€3.50) and a cheese and meat platter (€8) at
the bar. Daily 9am–12.30pm & 3.30–7.30pm.
La Cacciatora Via Strèda de Contrin 26, Alba di
Canazei T0462 601 411, Wlacacciatora.it. This large
chalet-style hotel has a cosy wood-panelled lounge with a
welcoming fire in winter. Some rooms are in better shape
than others – the panorama suites are worth the extra
€40, with modern interiors and spacious bathrooms.
There’s a complimentary afternoon buffet of nibbles and
home-made cakes daily, and facilities include a heated
pool, sauna, steam room, wine cellar and gym. Rates are
half board. €212
CORVARA
Monti Pallidi Via Col Alt 75 T0471 836 081,
Wmontipallidi.net. This chalet-style B&B has excellentvalue,
contemporary rooms and mini-apartments, most with
kitchenettes. There’s free parking on the premises. €88
Rosa Alpina Strada Micurá de Rü 20, San Cassiano in
Badia T0471 849 500, Wrosalpina.it. The luxurious
“Alpine Rose” is a cool, luscious and extremely hip spahotel.
Take a dip in the pool, indulge in a few spa treatments
and dine in the highly rated St Hubertus restaurant, but be
warned – you could easily part with €800 a day. €400
Bolzano (Bozen)
The gently historic capital of Alto Adige, BOLZANO (largely known by its German
name, Bozen) straddles the junction of the jade-hued Alpine waters of the Talvera
(Talfer) and Isarco (Eisack) rivers. Winter and summer see the town’s 100,000
population swell with tourists, as it makes a good jumping-off point for exploring the
surrounding mountainscape. Bolzano’s centre maintains a relaxed pace of life, its
highlight for most visitors being “Ötzi” the prehistoric Ice Man.
Brief history
Located in a predominantly sunny, sheltered bowl, for centuries Bolzano was a valley
market town and way station whose fortunes in the Middle Ages swayed as the counts
of Tyrol and the bishops of Trento competed for power. The town passed to the
Habsburgs in the fourteenth century, then at the beginning of the nineteenth century
Bavaria took control, opposed by Tyrolese patriot and military leader Andreas Hofer.
THE ITALIANIZATION OF THE TYROL
The South Tyrol (Südtirol) was Italy’s reward for cooperating with the Allies during World War I.
But when Mussolini’s Fascists came to power in 1923 the region was renamed Alto Adige after
the upper reaches of the Adige River, and despite the fact that German speakers outnumbered
Italian speakers by around ten to one, a process of sometimes brutal Italianization was imposed
on the area. Cartographers remade maps, substituting Italian place names (often made up) for
German; people were forced to adopt Italian names; the teaching of German in schools was
banned and stonemasons even chipped away German inscriptions from tombstones. World
War II then intervened, and by 1946, Austria and Italy came to an agreement ratified under the
Paris Peace Treaty that Austria would give up its claim to the region on condition that Italy took
steps to redress some of the cultural damage perpetrated under Fascism.
Successive governments have channelled funds into the area allowing the region more
independence than ever before and much greater say in local law. Over the last few years, Italy
has moved closer into the European Union, and its central and regional governments have
become more tolerant of ethnic diversity and, increasingly, German is the language of
preference in Südtirol.
325
5
BOLZANO BOZEN TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
His battle in 1809 to keep the Tyrol under Austrian rule was only temporarily
successful, as in the same year the Austrian emperor ceded the Tyrol to the Napoleonic
kingdom of Italy. More changes followed, as Bolzano was handed back to Austria until
World War I, whereupon it passed, like the rest of the province, to Italy.
Piazza Walther and the Duomo
Bolzano’s heart is Piazza Walther, whose pavement cafés, around its statue of the
Minnesänger (troubadour) Walther von der Vogelweide, are the town’s favoured
meeting places. The southern flank is dominated by the Duomo, a church converted
into a cathedral as recently as 1964. Built in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and
restored following bomb damage during World War II, it sports a strikingly multicoloured
ceramic roof and elaborately carved spire.
Chiesa dei Domenicani
Via Cappuccini • Mon–Sat 9.30am–5pm, Sun noon–6pm • Free
A couple of streets west of Piazza Walther, the Chiesa dei Domenicani has frescoes of
fifteenth-century courtly life painted on the walls of its decaying cloisters, framed by a
growth of stone tracery. Inside, the Cappella di San Giovanni, built at the beginning of
the fourteenth century, resembles a Byzantine church, retaining frescoes by painters of
the Giotto school, including a Triumph of Death, underneath a star-spangled vault.
Museo Archeologico
Via Museo (Museumstrasse) 43 • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm; also open Mon 10am–6pm in July, Aug & Dec • €9 • T0471 320 100,
Warchaeologiemuseum.it
Bolzano’s top attraction is the Museo Archeologico, a superb and informative exhibition
built around the Ice Man, a frozen, mummified body discovered in the ice of the
Ötzaler Alps in 1991, just 92m from the border with Austria. At first a policeman
estimated the body – nicknamed “Ötzi” – to be around 100 years old; he was out by
around 5200 years, as later experts dated the corpse to around 3300 BC. Visitors queue
up to peer into the €200,000-per-year, temperature-controlled cell where the
surprisingly diminutive Ötzi lies dry-frozen, his complexion that of cured ham and
glistening with tiny ice crystals. The rest of the exhibits include possessions found on or
around the body – his still serviceable bearskin cap, his longbow and arrows,
firelighting gear, a shamanic first-aid kit – as well as an incredibly realistic, life-size
silicon model showing what experts think Ötzi would have looked like and numerous
displays and films explaining how he came to be preserved on the mountainside. The
Ötzi story is one of the most fascinating archeology has ever produced and arguments
about who he was and how he died rage on in academia.
Museion
Via Dante 6 • Daily 10am–6pm, Thurs closes at 10pm • €7; free after 6pm on Thurs • Wmuseion.it
Bolzano’s museum of contemporary art, Museion, is housed in a strikingly modern
building, a futuristic glass cube. The museum has a collection of about two thousand
pieces, and exhibitions change every few months or so – check the website to see what’s on.
Piazza della Vittoria
Across the River Talvera (Talfer) a riverside walk upstream brings you to the Ponte
Talvera where Bolzano’s German and Gothic quarter ends and Piazza della Vittoria
signals the beginning of the 1930s Functionalist quarter, much of it laid out by
Mussolini’s favourite architect, Marcello Piacentini. The Fascist-period triumphal arch
(1928) on the square is something of a controversial monument, not least due to its
inscription: “Here is the border of the Motherland. Set the banners down. From this
point on we educated others with language, law and culture.” It was bombed by
German-speaking separatists in the late 1980s and, until a cleanup a few years ago, was
covered with graffiti. Today it is surrounded by railings and seems to be permanently
under renovation – possibly to keep protestors at arm’s length.
THE ÖTZI CULT
Since Europe’s most famous ice man was discovered on a lonely Alpine mountainside in 1991,
an entire culture has sprouted around this anonymous Ladin forebear. Conspiracy theories
have come thick and fast with some “revealing” Ötzi to be a Peruvian mummy transported to
the Alps for publicity purposes. Others have claimed to be his direct descendants, while the
“Ötzi diaries”, which appeared in the wake of the infamous “Hitler diaries”, were quickly
dismissed as tomfoolery. The “Ötzi curse” stems from the fact that he was found on a
palindromic date (19.9.1991), and indeed some people linked with the discovery have since
died unexpectedly, while one woman has even offered to bear a child using Ötzi’s 5000-yearold
sperm – she was politely rejected.
327
5
BOLZANO BOZEN TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION BOLZANO
By train Bolzano’s train station is a few minutes’ walk
southeast of Piazza Walther through a scruffy park on Via
Stazione. Timetables at Wsii.bz.it
Destinations Bressanone (every 30min; 30min); Merano
(every 30min; 40min); Trento (every 30min; 30–50min);
Vipiteno (every 30min; 1hr).
By bus Bolzano’s bus station, centrally placed at Via
Perathoner 4, serves most (but not all) the small villages
and resorts in the province.
Destinations Cavalese (hourly; 1hr 25min; first train to
Auer then bus); Corvara (6 daily; 2hr 30min; via Plan/
Wolkenstein or Ortisei); Merano (hourly; 50min); Siusi
(every 30min; 40min).
Tourist office Piazza Walther 8 (Mon–Fri 9am–7pm, Sat
9.30am–6pm, June–Oct also Sun 10am–2pm; T0471
307 000, Wbolzano-bozen.it).
GETTING AROUND
By bike Bikes are available to rent from the tourist office
for €5/day.
By car Hertz has branches at the airport (T0471 254 266)
while Maggiore is in town at Via Renon 10 (T0471 971
531). You can park at Parcheggio Piazza Walther; Central
Parking, Piazza Stazione; or Bolzano Centro, Via Mayr-
Nusser: all charge about €2.50/hr.
By taxi Radio Taxi is your best bet (T0471 981 111).
ACCOMMODATION
Figl Piazza del Grano 9 T0471 978 412, Wfigl.net. This
shuttered guesthouse in the Corn Market has been serving
guests for a century so must be doing something right.
Rooms are simple, cheerful, business-standard affairs with
stock-issue bathrooms and free wi-fi. Breakfast (an extra
€4–16) can be taken in the wood-panelled restaurant or
out on the piazza. Parking is €15 a night. €132
★Hotel Greif Piazza Walther T0471 318 000, Wgreif
.it. This stylish hotel just off the main square has 33 spacious
rooms, each individually designed with its own character and
atmosphere. Interiors feature blond wood and polished
timber floors, contemporary art, plus bathrooms made of
eleven types of marble. Guests can use the garden and pool
at Grief’s sister hotel, the Parkhotel Laurin, while the trendy
rooftop bar (see p.328) is one of the coolest in town. €194
Magdalener Hof Via Rencio 48/A T0471 978 267,
Wbolzano-hotel-bozen.com. Two kilometres east of town,
this hotel has a pleasant garden with outdoor swimming pool.
Rooms in the main building are comfortable although the
decor is a bit dated with chintzy curtains, while the pricier
rooms (€169) in the modern block are stylish with trendy
armchairs and spacious bathrooms. The restaurant (open to
non-guests) has seating on a pleasant terrace. €135
Ostello Bolzano/Jugendherberge Bozen Via Renon
23 T0471 300 865, Wostello.bz. This cheerful hostel is
one of a chain in the South Tyrol offering good-quality,
low-cost accommodation to young people and families
with children. Private rooms are a bit of a squeeze,
although they are great value; there are no double or twin
rooms (singles only; €32), but extra beds can be added.
Facilities include a small kitchen, board games, table tennis
and the use of laundry facilities. Dorm €24.50
★Parkhotel Holzner Via del Paese 18, Soprabolzano
T0471 345 231, Wparkhotel-holzner.com. This
gorgeous hotel is at the top of the Renon cable car in a
spectacular location overlooking the mountains and valley
below. Set in an Alpine Art Nouveau building, the attractive
rooms in the main building feature wooden furniture; some
have pretty floral patterned wallpaper. Facilities include a
panoramic tower, an inviting pool and a lovely garden, ideal
for children to run around, or for adults to enjoy a drink or
two at sunset and soak in the great views. €242
Parkhotel Laurin Via Laurin 4 T0471 311 000,
Wlaurin.it. Built in 1910, this smart hotel is set in a verdant
garden oasis with a small summer swimming pool, children’s
play area, bar and gourmet restaurant. The Art Deco-styled
rooms are restful and understated; some have terraces and
others balconies.. The food in the secluded open-air
restaurant is first rate and the same menu is available in the
lounge bar, with its King Laurin fresco (1911) by Jugendstil
artist Bruno Goldschmitt. Bikes for guests’ use (with child
seats available, too) and free wi-fi. €160
CAMPING
Moosbauer Via Merano 101, 5km from the city centre
on the main Bolzano–Merano road T0471 918 492,
Wmoosbauer.com. This campsite is one of the best in the
area, with clean facilities and a family-friendly atmosphere.
There’s a restaurant and inviting swimming pool with sun
loungers, too. Pitches €17.40, plus €10.20 per adult
THE MUSEUMOBIL CARD
The Museumobil card (Wmobilcard.info) gives free unlimited use of public transport (buses,
regional trains and certain funivie) in the region, and free access to more than eighty museums
(almost all museums in the Alto Adige): a three-day card costs €28, and a seven-day card €32.
It’s available from every tourist office across the Alto Adige.
EATING, DRINKING AND NIGHTLIFE
Piazza delle Erbe is the place to go for a quick eat, packed as it is with stalls selling wurstel, apfel strudel, local cheeses,
hams, breads and fabulous fruit and salads, with no shortage of exuberant bars and cafés offering beer and inexpensive
fare. As for nightlife there are pubs aplenty, with Fri- and Sat-night crowds spilling out onto the street; for a local aperitif,
ask for a Veneziana (Aperol, champagne or prosecco, ice and a slice of lemon).
CAFÉS AND GELATERIE
Exil Piazza del Grano 2/A T0471 971 814. A popular
spot that attracts quite a crowd for its laidback, welcoming
atmosphere; the interior is airy, and in summer seating
spills out onto the street. It’s a good spot for a light lunch,
with salads (€7.80) and bruschetta (€5.90) on the menu.
Mon–Sat 10am–midnight.
Menodiciotto Piazza Parrocchia 7 T0471 324 787.
Just across from the Duomo, this gelateria serves 24
flavours of ice cream (all gluten-free); the seasonal fruit
flavours only use water (no milk); in winter they also make
sweet crêpes (€3.50) with a variety of fillings including
Nutella. Daily 10.30am–11pm.
RESTAURANTS
Hopfen & Co Piazza Erbe/Obstplatz T0471 303 387,
Wboznerbier.it. Two pot-bellied brewing kettles let you
know this is Bozen’s favourite brewpub, where you can
enjoy the house brew with some fine soak-up material
such as beer gulasch (€13.50), spare ribs (€13.50) and, to
finish off, apfel strudel (€4.50) swimming in vanilla sauce.
Mon–Sat 9.30am–1am, Sun 9.30am–midnight.
Humus Via Argentieri/Silbergasse 16/D T0471 971
961, Whumus-bistro.com. Egyptian/Italian-run bistro
serving salads, veggie dishes, cakes, daily changing lunch
menus and, of course, humus (mains around €7.50) in a
pleasant wooden interior with wine bottles lining the
walls. It’s also a popular spot to enjoy a drink or two as you
snack on some Middle Eastern nibbles. Mon–Sat
9.30am–10pm.
Il Tinello Via Crispi 9 T0471 324 711, Wtinello.bz.it.
Tucked away on a narrow street, this place rustles up
home-made Italian-Mediterranean fare – the speciality is
the home-made tagliatelle, which comes with a variety of
sauces including shrimps and lemon juice (€9.80) or spicy
sausage, olives and tomatoes (€9.50). Mon–Sat noon–
2.30pm & 7–10pm.
Kaiserkron Piazza della Mostra 2 T0471 980 214,
Wkaiserkron.bz. Fine dining in a beautiful Baroque
building or outside on the quiet, elegant piazza. The menu
features Italian and international dishes with local
influences – try dishes such as gnocchi in a sauté of
cabbage and speck (€13) or veal loin on spinach cream with
chanterelle mushrooms and celeriac mash (€24.50). Mon–
Sat noon–2.15pm & 7–9.30pm.
★Löwengrube Piazza Dogana 3 T0471 970 032,
Wloewengrube.it. This trendy restaurant and lounge bar is
housed in the city’s oldest stube, with frescoes dating back
to the sixteenth century. Wine and cheese tastings take
place in the cellar (book ahead), while in summer dining is
on a smart terrace. The cuisine is Italian with a twist, with
the likes of foie gras ice cream and a creative take on vitello
tonnato (a Piemontese starter of cold veal covered in a
creamy mayonnaise-like sauce; €14) featuring on the menu.
Mon–Sat 11am–2.30pm & 7–10.30pm.
Vögele Via Goethe 3 T0471 973 938, Wvoegele.it.
This historic nineteenth-century restaurant was once a
meeting point for philosophers and poets, including
Goethe. Dining is in a series of partitioned areas on the first
floor, or in a cosy wooden dining room on the ground floor.
The menu features both Italian and heartier Alpine meat
dishes with mains at €15. There are also lighter dishes
served at lunch until 4pm and at dinner until 11pm. Mon–
Sat 11am–2.30pm & 7–10pm.
BARS
★Fischbanke Via Dr Streiter Gasse 26/A T340 5707
468. Laidback bar and café where you can enjoy a glass of
wine (€4) at marble counters that once made up the city’s
fish market – hence the name. The enthusiastic owner
creates a relaxed ambience, and you can snack on salads
(€7.80) and bruschetta (€5.90) stacked high with local
produce. March–Nov Mon–Sat 11am–10pm.
★Grifoncino Rooftop Lounge Via della Rena 28
T0471 318 000, Wgreif.it. The leafy rooftop lounge of the
Hotel Greif is a stylish spot to enjoy a sundowner as you soak in
the views of town. Creative cocktails are prepared by
experienced barman Christian Gruber, with exciting takes on
classics, such as Asian mojito made with refreshing ginger and
Japanese shiso leaves. The terrace closes at 11pm, although
the action then continues on the ground floor in the hotel’s
fashionable Grifoncino bar. Mon–Sat 5pm–1am.

BOLZANO’S CABLE CARS
A trip up in any of Bolzano’s three cable cars gives a small taste of the high peaks that surround
the city: for fares and times on all three cable cars, see Wsii.bz.it. The first ascends from Via
Renòn (Rittnerstrasse), a ten-minute walk from the train station, to Soprabolzano (Oberbozen).
It’s the longest cable-car journey in Europe, with the largest change in height. Alternatively the
San Genesio/Jenesien cable car offers stupendous views of the Catinaccio/Rosengarten massif
– the station is at Via Sarentino, 1.5km north of the town centre along the river (bus #12 or #14).
On the high Alpine pastures at the top, you’ll see blond-maned Haflinger horses grazing. The
third cable car goes to Colle/Kohlern from the station across the river south of the train station
at Ponte Campiglio. In operation since 1908, it is the oldest cable car in the world.

Around Bolzano
Bolzano makes a great base for a few easy half-day trips to visit various castles and
fortresses that almost ring the city. For wine buffs, it’s good to know that Bolzano is
located at the head of the Strada del Vino or Wine Road (Südtiroler Weinstrasse), which
runs south to the border with Trentino.
329
5
BOLZANO BOZEN TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
Castel Roncolo
Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • €8 • Wroncolo.info • Free shuttle bus from Piazza Walther (every 15–30min Tues–Sun 10am–6pm)
Just 5km from Bolzano, the thirteenth-century Castel Roncolo (Schloss Runkelstein)
contains probably the best secular frescoes in Europe, showing people hunting and
dancing, and other scenes from courtly life. In the Sala del Torneo, look out for a fresco
showing a fishing party: in the background a noble is offering a fish to a lady – the
medieval equivalent of an indecent proposal. Pier Paolo Pasolini filmed some of his
Decameron (1971) here.
Castello d’Appiano
Hocheppanerweg • April–Oct Thurs–Tues 10am–6pm • Chapel by 20min guided tour only €4; grounds free • T0471 936 081,
Whocheppan.com
Around 8km southwest of Bolzano, high above the village of APPIANO (Eppan), a clutch
of thirty or so fortresses and castles can be seen from the ruined battlements of Castello
Appiano (Schloss Hocheppan). In the castle chapel, secular frescoes show women flirting
at the altar and one of the earliest representations of the South Tyrolean knödel, or
dumpling. From the car park it’s a thirty-minute uphill walk, rewarded by stunning views,
and there’s a pleasant café and restaurant with outdoor seating within the castle walls.
Castel Firmiano/Sigmundskron
Sigmundskronerstrasse 53 • Late March to mid-Nov Fri–Wed 10am–6pm • €10 • T0471 631 264, Wmessner-mountain-museum.it • Bus
#9 from Bolzano bus station
One of the most imposing fortresses in the area is Firmiano/Sigmundskron, perched on
an outcrop of porphyry rock which made it a strategic base for the Bishop of Trento in
the tenth century before falling into ruin in the sixteenth. The site was brought back from
the dead in 2003 by mountaineer Reinhold Messner, who transformed it into the flagship
of his group of mountain museums. A trail leads up and through the castle towers that
contain a vast collection of paintings, sculptures – and objects such as a huge prayer
wheel – celebrating the Himalayas, the Alps and the world’s other lofty locations.
Strada del Vino
Fans of the grape are well catered for around Bolzano, with a Strada del Vino or Wine
Road (Wweinstrasse.com) enabling visitors to combine sightseeing with tastings. The
40km route proper begins at Nallas (Nals) just north of Bolzano, but you can also join
it at Appiano (Eppan) and wend your way through sunny vineyards to Salurno (Salurn)
halfway between Bolzano and Trento. This is one of the oldest wine-growing areas of all
German-speaking regions – some claim the tradition goes back to the Iron Age – and
it’s also one of the smallest in Italy. Certainly, the wine industry was well established in
Roman times, with the colonists from down south finding that locally made barrels
with metal hoops were much better for transporting wine back to Rome than their clay
amphorae. The vines in the region are often strung on wide pergolas, the traditional
method of viticulture here, which allows the Ora breeze blowing from Lake Garda to
circulate around the grapes, giving a beneficial cooling effect. Others are on hillsides
too steep for machinery, so all work still has to be done by hand.
The route’s main halt is CALDARO (Kaltern), home to many sixteenth-century buildings
in Uberetsch style, combining northern Gothic and southern Renaissance architectural
details. Wines from the vineyards around this small village have won numerous awards;
one of the best places to taste them is Punkt (Wwein.kaltern.com), a wine bar/information
point on the main square. Alternatively, two cellars near the village centre also offer wine
tasting – Kellerei Kaltern and Erste & Neue Kellerei (Werste-neue.it). Within walking
distance, too, on the Wine Road on the way to Lake Caldaro, the producer Manincor
(Wmanincor.com) is well worth a visit for its combination of modern architecture and
traditional estate buildings, as well as its fine vintages.
Another centre to head for is the village of TERMENO (Tramin), from which the
varietal Gewürtztraminer gets its name.
Alpe di Siusi (Seiser Alm)
The grasslands of the Alpe di Siusi (Seiser Alm), to the east of Bolzano, are Europe’s largest
Alpine plateau, extending over sixty square kilometres above the rest of the valley bordered
by Sciliar (Schlern), a flat-topped, sheer mountain which splits off at one end into two
peaks. The lush summer pastures 2000m above sea level are superb for mountain biking
and hiking, especially now that the area, protected by the Parco Naturale dello Sciliar, is
closed to road traffic (except for guests of hotels on the Alpe) between 9am and 5pm.
If you are travelling by bus to Siusi (Seis) from Bolzano you can stash mountain bikes
in the luggage compartment of the bus. The service passes through FIÈ AM SCILIAR
(Völs am Schlern), famous for inventing the curative “hay bath”.
Compaccio and Saltria
From Siusi you can ascend to COMPACCIO (Compatsch) on the plateau by a connecting bus
service or by cable car (mid-May to mid-Sept 8am–7pm; mid-Sept to early Nov 8am–6pm).
Compaccio is the starting point for many excellent day-hikes, such as the two-and-a-halfhour
trek to Tierser Alpl or a climb of similar length to Rifugio Bolzano al Monte Pez. You can
get the views the easier way by taking the chair lift to Restaurant Bullaccia/Puflatsch, enjoying
a coffee and buchweizentorte (buckwheat and redcurrant cake) when you get there.
A shuttle bus from Compaccio runs to SALTRIA (Saltner), about 5km to the east (every
30min; 15min), where a smattering of hotels are more or less the only buildings. Here,
horses graze on the tough grass, picking their way between the bogs and streams, and
the main evidence of human activity is dairy farming and some logging in the woods.
Val Gardena (Grödnertal)
Trails and chair lifts connect the Alpe di Suisi with the Val Gardena (Grödnertal), a
valley with plenty of squeaky-clean guesthouses linked by a continuous stream of

TÖRGGELEN SEASON
A good time to sample Alto Adige’s wine is in the autumn during the Törggelen season. This
roughly coincides with the arrival of the Neuien – the first bottles of new, young wine – from about
the end of September to the beginning of December. It traditionally marks the passage of the year,
celebrating a golden time of clear autumnal weather before winter sets in. Farmers and innkeepers
lay on a spread of speck (smoked ham), a bread called schüttelbrot and roast chestnuts,
accompanied by wines from the surrounding hills. As well as the village taverns and enotecas along
the Wine Road (see p.329), try visiting Loosmannhof (T0471 365 551), Località Signato/Signat.

331
5
NORTHEAST OF BOLZANO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
tourist buses making their way along the Great Dolomites Road to Cortina
d’Ampezzo. The main village in the valley, Ortisei (Sankt Ulrich), has for centuries
been a big producer of religious sculpture and, more recently, hand-carved wooden
toys, with several families each keeping their own particular design going. Almost
three thousand woodcarvers in the valley still make furniture and religious statues,
but Ortisei, like the neighbouring villages of Santa Cristina (Sankt Christina) and
Selva (Wolkenstein), is now mainly a ski resort, within easy reach of the Sella Ronda,
a route of ski runs and lifts encircling the Sella mountain range that takes a whole
day to complete.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION ALPE DI SIUSI SEISER ALM
By bus There are connections from Bolzano to Siusi (every
30min; 40min) and Ortisei (hourly; 1hr 15min), and from
Siusi to Ortisei (hourly; 30min).
Tourist office This office at Compatsch 50 in Compaccio
(Mon–Fri 8.15am–12.30pm, Sat 8.15am–noon; T0471 727
904, Wseiseralm.net) handles information for the entire area.
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING
SIUSI
Adler Mountain Lodge Via Piz 11, Castelrotto T0471
723 077, Wadler-lodge.com. Light floods in through
floor-to-ceiling windows at this stylish Alpine lodge with
modern interiors – it has tastefully decorated suites in
natural larch plus chalets with log fires and private saunas.
There’s a heated outdoor pool and a panoramic hay sauna,
and they rent out ski equipment in winter and bikes in
summer. You have to book for a minimum of a week: rates
are full board per person per week . €1624
★Gostner Schwaige Via San Vigilio 7, Siusi T347 836
8154. Not-to-be-missed, this welcoming family-run chaletrestaurant
serves exceptional dishes that are beautifully
presented, often with colourful edible flowers – you can even
have a flower salad. The mouthwatering cheese and speck
platter (€16.90) features cheeses made on the premises, or try
the tasty kaiserschmarrn, shredded pancake with fruits. Daily
8.30am–6pm; dinner by advance booking only.
Hotel Arvina Via Patener 4, Siusi T0471 706 436,
Whotelarvina.com. This ecofriendly hotel features
welcoming and attractive rooms in natural materials
including local wood; the rooms have added touches such
as glass partitions filled with hay to give the place a rustic
touch. The restaurant is one of the best in the area, serving
traditional and international dishes. €166
SALTRIA
Tirler Saltria 59 T0471 727 927, Wtirler.com. All the
rooms here have balconies or terraces, and feature heated
clay walls, plus pine and larch furnishings, whose essential
oils are said to have a relaxing effect. There’s a hay sauna, as
well as an attractive heated indoor and outdoor pool. Rates
are half board. €232
VAL GARDENA
Pension Briol Via Briol 1, Barbiano-Tre Chiese T0471
650 125, Wbriol.it. Not in the Val Gardena itself, but
across the Isarco River from Ponte Gardena above the
village of Barbiano (Barbian), the gateway to the valley.
This guesthouse is a rare example of Bauhaus style in the
Alps – nothing much has changed since 1928, when it was
designed by artist Hubert Lanzinger. Although there are
few mod cons, the simplicity and unspoilt location in
flower-filled meadows are unbeatable. €80
Northeast of Bolzano
The route northeast of Bolzano along the Isarco (Eisacktal) Valley is one of the main
routes between Italy and northern Europe, crossing the border into Austria at the
famous Brenner Pass (1375m), the lowest in the Alps. Protestant reformer Martin
Luther was one of many travellers to have walked over the Brenner Pass on his epic
journey to Rome in 1510. A motorway and high-speed train line to Innsbruck now
make light work of the distance, and the ancient towns of Bressanone (Brixen) and
Vipiteno (Sterzing) are engaging places on the way to stretch the legs. Nearby is the
wild protected area called the Parco Naturale Fanes-Sennes-Braies accessible via the Val
Pusteria (Pustertal), a side valley off the Isarco. If you are planning to walk any of the
long-distance walking trails known as alte vie (literally “high ways”) you will almost
certainly visit the Val Pusteria, as most of the trails launch from there. Train is the best
way to reach it, with a line branching off the main Bolzano–Innsbruck tracks at
Fortezza (Franzenfeste) and serving the drowsy settlements of the Val Pusteria, the
market town of Brunico (Bruneck) and Dobbiaco (Toblach), from where there are buses
to Cortina d’Ampezzo.
Bressanone (Brixen)
Wonderfully medieval BRESSANONE (Brixen), the principal settlement in the Val d’Isarco, is
well worth a halt or even a couple of days for its atmospheric old town and some fine places
to stay. This entirely German-speaking town was an independent state for a thousand years,
its bishops in a constant state of rivalry with the neighbouring counts of Tyrol based in
Merano. The bishops’ palace, next to the Duomo, still serves as the town’s epicentre.
Duomo
Piazza del Duomo (Domplatz) • Daily 9am–6pm • Free
Destroyed by fire in the eleventh century and rebuilt in its current Baroque style in the
eighteenth, the Duomo is Bressanone’s most imposing building. Inside, it’s decorated in
faux marble, glass chandeliers and lots of gilding, but the really interesting part lies to the
side, in the fantastically ornate cloisters, which were frescoed in the fourteenth century.
Hofburg Palace
Piazza Palazzo Vescovile (Hofburgplatz) 2 • Mid-March to Oct Tues–Sun 10am–5pm; late Nov to early Jan Tues–Sun 10am–5pm only
Nativity collection open • €7; late Nov to early Jan €4 • T0472 830 505, Whofburg.it
Built as a residence for the bishops of Bressanone, the beautiful Hofburg Palace is one
of Alto Adige’s most important historical buildings, with its splendid inner courtyard
lined by Renaissance loggias on three floors. It houses the Museo Diocesano,
displaying a collection of medieval, Baroque, Classical and Romantic works of art,
along with vestments belonging to Bressanone’s bishop-princes. There’s also an
impressive collection of Nativity scenes, including a rather fun exhibition of
terracotta statuettes.
Pharmaziemuseum
Via Ponte Aquila (Adlerbrückengasse) 4 • July & Aug Mon–Fri 2–6pm, Sat 11am–4pm; Sept–June Tues & Wed 2–6pm, Sat 11am–4pm •
€3.50 • T0472 209 112, Wpharmaziemuseum.it
An unexpected gem above the town’s oldest family-run pharmacy, the
Pharmaziemuseum boasts a weird and wonderful selection of antique vials and
pillboxes, pharmaceutical apparatus, and sumptuously illustrated medical manuals
from the late sixteenth century.
Abbazia Novacella (Neustift)
Grounds Mon–Sat 10am-4pm • Free • Library, Museum, Art Gallery & Basilica By guided tour only Mon–Sat 10am, 11am, 2pm, 3pm
& 4pm; mid-July to mid-Sept also noon & 1pm; Jan–March closed Mon • Guided tours €7 • T0472 836 189, Wabbazianovacella.it
Just 3km from the town centre, and a pleasant thirty-minute stroll along the river from
the centre of town, the Abbazia Novacella is the most important abbey in the Südtirol.
It’s known for its beautiful Baroque library, art collection and museum, as well for the
well-regarded wine produced here and sold direct to the public. The medieval cloisters
are also well worth viewing.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION BRESSANONE BRIXEN
By train The train station is 500m southwest of the
historical centre along Via Stazione.
Destinations Bolzano (at least hourly; 35min), Brennero
(every 30min; 50min; change here for Innsbruck).
By bus The bus station is on Via Dante on the southeastern
edge of the historical centre.
Destinations Bolzano (5 daily; 50min); Brunico (every
30min; 1hr); Ortisei (8 daily; 1hr); Siusi (hourly; 1hr).
Tourist office Viale Ratisbona 9 (Oct–May Mon–Fri
9.30am–12.30pm & 2–6pm, Sat 9am–12.30pm; June–
Sept Mon–Fri 8.30am–6pm, Sat 9am–1pm & 1.30–5pm;
T0472 836 401, Wbrixen.org).
333
5
NORTHEAST OF BOLZANO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
ACCOMMODATION
Elephant Via Rio Bianco 4 T0472 832 750,
Whotelelephant.com. This historic hotel is one of the
oldest in the Dolomites, with comfortable rooms and a
lovely garden. The elephant theme, including two beautiful
murals, refers to an incident in the sixteenth century, when
an elephant is said to have stopped in Bressanone on its
way from India to Vienna – a gift to the Archduke
Maximilian of Austria. The restaurant here is renowned for
its mouthwatering steak tartare. €106
Goldener Adler Via Ponte Aquila 9 T0472 200 621,
Wgoldener-adler.com. Built in 1500, this hotel in the heart
of Bressanone’s old town is decorated with historic furnishings,
including a wonderful old stove that is still used today to heat
part of the building. The standard rooms are simple – go for a
spacious superior room with brushed parquet flooring. There’s
a little sauna and steam room, too. €148
Löwenhof Via Lago di Varna 60 T0472 836 216,
Wloewenhof.it. Hotel and campsite complex, with a large
outdoor swimming pool, in meadowland 2km north of
Bressanone in Varna (Vahrn); several buses travel here on
weekdays, fewer at weekends. Campsite closed Nov–
March. Doubles €100, pitches €12 plus €8.50 per person
Mayrhofer Via Tratten 17 T0472 836 327,
Wmayrhofer.it. A five-hundred-year-old townhouse that
is the family home of the friendly Mayrhofer family who
live on the top floor. The rooms are simple, but its ambience
is cosy and homely, with books dotted about and old family
photographs and prints decorating the walls. €84
Pupp Via Mercato Vecchio 36 T0472 268 355, Wsmallluxury.
it. A stylish hotel with modern decor – the
Chocolate room is decorated in dark brown hues, while the
light and airy Cream room has blond wood floors. Some of
the rooms have a private terrace with jacuzzi. The rich
buffet breakfast includes fresh bread and pastries made at
the hotel’s pasticceria across the road. €188
Tallero Via Mercato Vecchio 35 T0472 830 577,
Wtallero.it. In a pretty pastel-coloured building, this
modern hotel has simple rooms with wooden furniture,
and some with small balconies. There’s an attached café on
the ground floor with tables lining the street. €116
EATING AND DRINKING
Finsterwirt Vicolo del Duomo/Domgasse 3 T0472 835
343, Wfinsterwirt.com. This elegant, old-fashioned
restaurant, with nineteenth-century oil paintings on the walls
and a grandfather clock, serves excellent local specialities such
as venison with sour cherries (€23) and buckwheat bacon
dumplings with speck (€14). Seating is inside or on a pretty
vine-shaded terrace. Tues–Sat 11.30am–2.15pm & 6.30–
9.15pm, Sun 11.30am–2.15pm.
Traubenwirt Portici Minori/Kleine Lauben 9 T0472 836
552, Wtraubenwirt.it. Generous portions of beef gulasch
(€17), cheese dumplings (€10) and truffle tagliarini (€15) are
served up at this friendly restaurant with outdoor seating;
there’s also a weekly changing menu featuring seasonal
produce, and pizzas (€6), too. Snacks and drinks are available
outside meal times. Daily 10am–midnight.
Vitis Vicolo del Duomo/Domgasse 3 T0472 835 343,
Wvitis.bz/it/ristorante-oste-scuro/vitis. Under the same
management as Finsterwirt on the first floor, this restaurant
and wine bar is a lovely spot to enjoy a glass of local white or
red (€3.50) accompanied by a platter of speck and cheese
(€15). A selection of Mediterranean dishes (€13) is available,
too, and there’s an atmospheric candlelit courtyard that is
particularly pleasant on a warm summer’s evening. Tues–Sat
10am–3pm & 5pm–midnight.

BRIXEN CARD
The Brixen Card is available free to anyone staying at registered accommodation in and
around Bressanone, and gives free access to public transport, the Acquarena pool, all Südtirol’s
museums and much more: see Wbrixencard.info for details.

Val Pusteria (Pusertal)
The entrance to the Val Pusteria (Pusertal), a wide, sleepy valley of cornfields and hay
meadows skirting the northern edge of the Dolomites, lies 4km north of Bressanone.
This is a rural area where dippers dart in and out of streams in the side valleys and the
sawing of timber cuts through the air. Higher up, you’re likely to see marmots – timid
creatures similar to guinea pigs – or more likely hear them, as they give out a piercing
whistle as a warning before speeding off to their burrows; on the scree-covered slopes,
chamois betray their presence with a tumbling of stones.
Many of the region’s long-distance alte vie footpaths start in the Val Pusteria: Alta
Via 1 starts from Lago di Braies (Pragser Wildsee), Alta Via 3 from Villabassa
(Niederdorf ), Alta Via 4 from San Candido (Innichen) and Alta Via 5 from Sesto
(Sexten). The valley is served by bus from Brunico (see below), and by train from
Fortezza (Franzensfeste).
Brunico (Bruneck)
An influx of people from the surrounding villages arrives daily in the otherwise
quiet market town of BRUNICO (Bruneck), which is also the transport hub of the
region. Brunico was the home of the best-known Tyrolean painter and woodcarver
Michael Pacher (c.1435–98), who straddled German Gothic and the more spare
Italian styles. His Vine Madonna can be found in its original setting in the parish
church of the village of San Lorenzo, 4km to the southwest, though there’s
something unsavoury about this Madonna and her pudgy child gripping a bunch of
black grapes.
Brunico Castle, on Schlossweg 2, houses a branch of the Messner Mountain Museum
(Wed–Mon: mid-May to Oct 10am–6pm; Boxing Day–April noon–6pm; €9) focusing
on the sherpas of Nepal.
Capriz Feinkäserei
Via Val Pusteria 1/B • Daily 9am–7pm • Museum €3 • T0472 869 268, Wcapriz.it
Just off the main road to Braies, some 17km west of Brunico, the Capriz Feinkäserei
goats’ cheese factory and museum is set in a stylish modern building. There’s an
excellent museum showing the process of cheese making with fun interactive exhibits,
and you can look into the factory through floor-to-ceiling windows to watch the cheese
being made. There’s a well-stocked shop selling a selection of cheeses, and an attached
café serving goats’ cheese sandwiches and more.
Schloss Taufers
Grounds Daily 10am–6pm (last entry 5pm) • Castle By daily guided tour only (50min) Easter–June at 11am, 2pm & 5pm; July & Aug at
10am, 11am, 2pm, 3pm & 4pm; Sept & Oct 11am, 2pm & 3pm • €9 • T0474 678 053, Wburgeninstitut.com
North of Brunico extends the remote Val di Tures where the principal attraction is
medieval Schloss Taufers, in the valley’s main settlement, CAMPO TURES (Sand in
Taufers). Its dungeons boast a gruesome array of torture instruments, and there are
frescoes by Pacher, but the most appealing aspect of the castle is its setting: stark grey
walls, bristling with towers, stand in contrast to the glistening backdrop of the
Zillertal glaciers.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION BRUNICO BRUNECK
By train The train station is a short walk southeast of the
town centre, with trains to Dobbiaco (at least hourly;
35min).
By bus Buses leave from near the train station, and run to
destinations along the Val Pusteria.
Destinations Bressanone (every 30min; 1hr); Campo Tures
(every 30min; 35min); Corvara (hourly; 1hr); Dobbiaco (at
least every 30min; 1hr).
Tourist office Rathausplatz 7 (July & Aug Mon–Fri
9am–7pm, Sat 9.30am–12.30pm & 3–6pm; Sept–June
Mon–Fri 9am–12.30pm & 3–6pm, Sat 9.30am–12.30pm;
T0474 555 722, Wbruneck.com).
THE MESSNER MOUNTAIN MUSEUM
Bressanone-born climber and explorer Reinhold Messner is renowned for having made the
first ascent of Everest without oxygen in 1978 and for being the first human to climb all
fourteen of the world’s peaks over 8000m. Having retired from climbing, Messner set up an
inspiring and engaging museum (Wmessner-mountain-museum.it) in his home region,
dedicated to the world’s mountain ranges and the cultures of the people who inhabit them.
The museum is spread over five branches – Firmian at Schloss Sigmundskron, Ortles near
Solda, the Dolomites branch south of Cortina d’Ampezzo, Juval in the Val Venosta, and Ripa at
Brunico Castle – occupying some pretty spectacular and remote places.
335
5
CORTINA D’AMPEZZO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING
Agnello Bianco Via Stuck 5 T0474 411 350,
Wweisseslamm.it. Rustic Alpine-style furnishings at this
family-run restaurant serving traditional Tyrolean specialities
using seasonal produce, including asparagus in spring and
hearty meats in autumn. Mon–Sat noon–2pm & 7–11pm.
Hotel Post Via Bastioni 9 T0474 555 127, Whotelpostbruneck.
com. In the centre of Brunico just a stone’s throw
away from the small cobbled streets of the old town, this
hotel has comfortable rooms and parking facilities; there’s
a reliable attached restaurant and café. €168
Parco Naturale Fanes-Sannes-Braies
For dramatic mountain vistas and not-too-crowded paths – plus an insight into some
of the Ladin legends (see p.322) – head for the Parco Naturale Fanes-Sannes-Braies,
southeast of Brunico. If you have a limited amount of time to spend in this beautiful
protected area, you should aim for the upper slopes of Alpe di Fanes, where you pick up
some of the best ridgeway paths. Footpaths cross the grassy plateaus, passing the rocks
of Castel de Fanes, home of Dolasilla, the mythical princess of the Ladini, and an area
called the Marmot Parliament. The lakes are fed by underground streams, which you
can sometimes hear, burbling deep beneath your feet.
Another way to see the park is to walk the (often busy) section of Alta Via 1 that runs
through it, a hike that takes three to four days, with overnight stops at refuges. The trail
starts at Lago di Braies (Pragser Wildsee), a spectacular deep-green lake surrounded by
pines, 8km off the main road through the Val Pusteria – according to legend, the lake
is a gateway to an underground kingdom. Several buses daily (hourly; in July & Aug
every 30min; 30min) run to the lake from Dobbiaco.
Also accessible from Brunico by cable car is the Plan de Corones, surrounded by
jagged peaks. Here, legend has it, Dolasilla was crowned a warrior princess at the top of
the mountain with the raiëta – a crystal that harnessed powerful forces.
Vipiteno (Sterzing)
Straddling the busy road north over the Brenner Pass to Innsbruck, VIPITENO
(Sterzing) is typically Tyrolean, with geranium-filled balconies and wood-panelled old
inns. The porticoed main street, however, Via Città Nuova (Neustadtstrasse), is more
reminiscent of locations further south, lined with elegant, battlemented palazzi erected
in Renaissance times by a locally based Florentine bank. At one end, the Zwölferturm
clock tower divides the old town from the new: the roof was rebuilt in 1867 after fire
destroyed the fifteenth-century original. The town is especially pretty on summer
nights when it’s lit by lanterns and there’s often a local festival, with live music and
foodie specialities.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION VIPITENO
By train The train station is in Via Stazione, a short walk
east of the town centre.
Destinations Bolzano (hourly; 1hr); Brennero (at least
hourly; 20min; change here for Innsbruck).
Tourist office Piazza Città 3 (Mon–Sat 8.30am–noon &
2.30–6pm; T0472 765 325, Wvipiteno.com).
Cortina d’Ampezzo
Dubbed the “Pearl of the Dolomites”, CORTINA D’AMPEZZO is well and truly part of
the mountains of Trentino-Alto Adige, even though it officially belongs to the Veneto
region next door. An upmarket ski resort – think an Italian St Moritz – Cortina boasts
a gorgeous setting, surrounded by a great circle of mountains, and it’s had a starring
role in many films, including The Pink Panther and For Your Eyes Only.
After hosting the Winter Olympics in 1956, Cortina swiftly became the resort to be seen
in and in the 1960s you were just as likely to spot movie stars such as Brigitte Bardot and
Sophia Loren sauntering down the Corso Italia as people in ski boots. Nowadays, the VIPs
it attracts tend to be titans of Italian industry – the Agnellis, Benettons, Barillas and the
president of Ferrari all frequent the resort – and the population swells from seven thousand
to around forty thousand during the ski season (roughly Christmas to Easter).
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION CORTINA D’AMPEZZO
By train The nearest train station is Calalzo di Cadore,
32km southeast; buses to Cortina are timed to coincide
with trains.
By bus Express bus services run by Cortina Express
(Wcortinaexpress.it) run to Cortina from Venezia airport
and Mestre train station, as well as Bologna train station
during the ski season. The bus station is on Via Marconi,
above town.
Destinations Calalzo (17 daily; 1hr); Dobbiaco (every 2hr;
45min).
Tourist office Corso Italia 81 (June–Sept & Dec–March
Mon–Sat 9am–8pm, Sun 10am–8pm; Oct, Nov, April &
May Mon–Sat 9am–1pm & 2–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm;
T0436 869 086, Winfodolomiti.it).
ACCOMMODATION
★Ambra Via XXIX Maggio 28 T0436 867 344,
Whotelambracortina.it. A four-star boutique hotel in a
central location a short walk from Corso Italia, the town’s main
artery; the rooms are furnished with antiques and wooden
fittings which give the place a cosy rustic touch. €150
Baita Fraina Località Fraina 1, 5km south of Cortina
T0436 3634, Wbaitafraina.it. A lovely B&B tucked away on
a mountainside a short drive from Cortina; the cosy interiors
are wood-panelled, with black-and-white family photos and a
couple of beautiful majolica heaters. The restaurant comes
particularly recommended, with dishes such as spaghetti with
stewed onion (€11) and deer fillet (€24). €100
Camping Cortina Via Campo di Sopra 2 T043 686
7575, Wcampingcortina.it. A friendly attractive campsite
in a beautiful rural setting, 2km south of town; facilities
include table tennis, table football, a swimming pool and
playground; there’s also a mini-mart to stock up on
supplies, and a pizzeria. Pitches €7, plus €8.50 per adult
Hotel Panda Via Roma 64 T0436 860 344,
Whotelpandacortina.com. A very pleasant, family-run,
three-star hotel with cosy rooms and corridors decorated
with black-and-white photos of Cortina in the past. There
are two apartments sleeping four with kitchenettes
(€240), as well as a couple of cheaper, simply furnished
basement rooms. €140
Rosapetra Zuel di Sopra 1 T0436 869 062,
Wrosapetracortina.it. A five-star boutique spa resort; most
of the rooms have private terraces, while the suites have a
mezzanine floor with a second bedroom, or a bathroom with
rustic wooden jacuzzi. There’s a small bar and a restaurant,
along with a gym and spa with heated pool, steam room and
sauna (open to non-guests for €40/day). €500
EATING AND DRINKING
★Agriturismo El Brite de Larieto Strada per Passo
Tre Croci, 6km east of Cortina T368 700 8083,
Welbritedelarieto.it. A friendly agriturismo and
farmhouse, where pigs, cows, goats, hens and even a
couple of Shetland ponies roam about. The restaurant
serves excellent dishes using top-quality produce sourced
directly from the farm, such as speck tartarie (€11) and
crunchy bacon served with veg (€20). You can buy cheeses
and cold cuts from the agriturismo’s shop down the road or
grab a picnic basket brimming with local produce for €15
(inclusive of blanket; July & Aug only). Book ahead. Fri–
Wed noon–3pm & 8–10pm.
Ariston Via Marconi 10 T0436 866 705,
Wristorantearistoncortina.it. Cortina’s best pizzas (€6.50)
come bubbling out of the wood-fired oven at this bustling
family-run pizzeria; plenty of other dishes are available, too
(from €11), and there are a handful of tables outside in
summer. Fri–Wed noon–2.30pm & 7–10.30pm.
Enoteca Baita Fraina Largo delle Poste 17 T0436
862 218, Wbaitafraina.it. Run by a family of sommeliers,
this wine bar in the heart of Cortina is a great spot to enjoy
a glass of wine (€3) as you nibble on a cheese (€13) or cold
cut (€11) platter. The menu also features a handful of light
dishes (from €13). Wed–Mon 10.30am–2.30pm &
5.30–10.30pm.
★Lago Ghedina Località Lago Ghedina 2, 6km
northwest of Cortina T0436 5646, Wlagoghedina.it.
In a stunning location with a terrace overlooking the
emerald waters of Lago Ghedina, this restaurant serves
creative dishes, including a mouthwatering pata negra dish
(€27), Nebraska beef (€27) and home-made casunziei
all’ampezzana (€12.50), a local dish of pasta squares
stuffed with beetroot. Thurs–Tues noon–3pm &
7.30–11pm.
Pontejèl Largo Poste 11 T0436 863 828,
Whotelpontejelcortina.it. Ladin and international dishes
are served at this family-run restaurant, with home-made
fig, smoked ricotta and speck cappelloni (folded pasta
squares; €12) and calf liver with onion (€20) both featuring
on the menu. It’s part of the Pontejèl hotel, which has six
simple rooms (€160). Thurs–Tues noon–2.30pm &
7–10pm.
337
5
MERANO AND AROUND TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
Merano and around
An hour north by train from Bolzano, MERANO (Meran) lies in an attractive, broad
stretch of the Adige (Etsch) Valley. Neatly tended apple orchards and vineyards cover
almost every square centimetre of the lower slopes and valley floor, but when you look
upwards the scale changes due to the two great mountain ranges – the Ortles (Ortler)
and the Giogaia di Tessa (Texelgruppe) encircling the town. Closer geographically and
in looks to the Swiss and Austrian Alps than the Dolomites, the grandeur of the
landscape turns up a notch here – and a simple event like a summer storm becomes a
drama, with the whole valley reverberating to the rumble of thunder.
A well-heeled spa town, relaxed, stylish and packed with affluent shoppers, Merano has
a mild climate that attracted Central Europeans at the beginning of last century after
Empress Elizabeth of Austria – known as Sissi – chose the town for her winter cure. The
époque bequeathed a resort of fin-de-siècle hotels, gardens and elegant promenades.
Duomo
Piazza del Duomo • Daily 9am–7pm • Free
At the eastern end of the fabulously arcaded Laubengasse/Via Portici is the town’s Duomo,
dedicated to St Nicholas. Pure Gothic in and out, it was one of the first cathedrals to be
built in the style in Tyrol. The most notable features are its intricate stained-glass windows,
attractive ceramic floor and the 83m-high clock tower, South Tyrol’s tallest.
Terme Merano
Plaza Terme 9 • Daily 9am–10pm • €18.50 for a day-ticket for the inside and outdoor pools, €25 for pools plus sauna • T0473 252 000,
Wtermemerano.it
Sitting impressively on the river’s south bank is Merano’s sparkling spa complex Terme
Merano, with fifteen indoor pools (open year round) and a raft of wellness, spa and
fitness facilities, all contained inside a huge steel-and-glass cube designed by architect
Matteo Thun. Treatments often use local South Tyrolean produce such as apples, grapes,
wool, hay and chestnuts. There are also ten outdoor pools (open from mid-May to
mid-Sept), including a full-length heated pool in a large park – it’s a great spot to while
away a summer’s afternoon and soak in the views of the surrounding mountains.
Trauttmansdorff Castle and Touriseum
Via Valentino 51/A • April–Oct daily 9am–7pm; first 2 weeks of Nov daily 9am–5pm; June, July & Aug Fri until 11pm • €12 •
Wtrauttmansdorff.it or Wwww.touriseum.it • Take bus #4 or #1B to the Botanischer Garten stop
Set amid the town’s botanical gardens, Trauttmansdorff Castle is the former residence of
Empress Elisabeth and houses the fascinating Touriseum (Museum of Tourism). It explores
the relationship between political events, social change and the rise of tourism in the South
Tyrol over the past couple of centuries using entertaining and often hands-on displays.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION MERANO
By train Merano’s train station is on Piazza Stazione, a
15min walk from the centre of town along Corso Libertà.
Destinations Bolzano (at least hourly; 40min); Mals (at
least hourly; 1hr 10min); Silandro (3 daily; 50min).
By bus Buses arrive and depart from the train station.
Destinations Bolzano (hourly; 45min); Lana (approx every
15min; 17min); Silandro (at least every 30min; 1hr).
Tourist office Corso Libertà 45 (Mon–Fri 9am–6pm, Sat
9am–4pm, Sun 10am–12.30pm; T0473 272 000,
Wmeran.eu).
ACCOMMODATION
Castel Fragsburg Via Fragsburg 3 T0473 244 071,
Wfragsburg.com. On a mountainside above the city, this
upmarket, seventeenth-century hunting lodge has a quiet
refined atmosphere; the charming rustic rooms feature
Alpine-style fittings, and the spa offers a range of holistic
treatments, plus yoga and meditation retreats. The
Michelin-starred restaurant serves top-notch food and has
a panoramic terrace with tremendous views. €150
Hotel Terme Merano Piazza Terme 1 T0473 259 000,
Whoteltermemerano.com. With an underground
passage to the Terme Merano (free entry for guests), this
hotel is the perfect spot to while away days in the thermal
baths. The hotel also has its own spa with swimming pool
and sauna. €278
Miramonti Via S. Caterina/St Kathreinstrasse 14,
Hafling T0473 279 335, Whotel-miramonti.com.
Twelve kilometres southeast of Merano, this stylish hotel is
perched on a mountainside with views to die for. The bright
rooms are decorated in earthy tones, and there’s a spa with
swimming pool. The wonderful restaurant has a glassfronted
panoramic platform. €180
★Ottmanngutt Via Verdi/Verdistrasse 18 T0473 449
656, Wottmanngut.it. Set in a 700-year-old building, this
elegant family-run B&B surrounded by vineyards and cypress
trees just a 5min walk from the town centre has nine wellappointed
rooms furnished with antiques. Cultural events are
held here monthly, and the B&B also produces its own wine,
which guests may sample. €119
EATING AND DRINKING
Bistro Pienzenau Via Pienzenau 6 T0473 235 979,
Wbistro.pienzenau.com. A 15min walk from the
Trauttmansdorff Castle, this pleasant restaurant is set in a
fourteenth-century fortress surrounded by greenery. The
innovative Mediterranean cuisine includes a number of fish
dishes such as bucatini alla carbonara di mare (€10), a
creative take on carbonara with fish, anchovies and bacon.
The restaurant also doubles as a B&B, with a handful of
rustic rooms (€100). Tues–Sun 12.30–2.30pm &
6.30–9.30pm.
★Miil Via Palade/Gampenstrasse 1 T0473 563 733,
Wmiil.info. About 8km south of Merano, this restaurant is
well worth the journey. It’s located by a watermill, with a
cosy, wooden-beamed interior and a leafy patio for
summer dining. The top-notch creative dishes use seasonal
ingredients, and there’s an attached wine shop and pretty
garden where ducks and pheasants roam freely. Primi €13,
secondi €22. Tues–Sat noon–2pm & 6.30–9.30pm.
Onkel Taa’s Bahnhofstrasse 17, Töll T0473 967 342;
take bus #5613. This unmissable place, around 6km
northwest of Merano, is located in the Bad Egart Habsburg
museum, though the colourful restaurant, bedecked in
knick-knacks, resembles a museum itself. Onkel Taa cooks
up some scrumptious Alpine fare (mains around €15), most
of which is made with local ingredients. Tues–Sat noon–
3pm & 6.30–11pm, Sun noon–3pm.
Sissi Via Galilei/Galileistrasse 44 T0473 231 062, Wsissi
.andreafenoglio.com. The best place to dine in town is the
pricey yet understated Sissi where renowned Italian chef
Andrea Fenoglio puts a sophisticated twist on traditional
Alpine and Mediterranean dishes. Primi €17, secondi €26.
Tues 7–10pm, Wed–Sun 12.15–2.30pm & 7–10pm.
Around Merano
Merano is a good base for exploring some seriously remote mountainscapes as well as
discovering one of the most significant castles in the region, Tirolo, and San Leonardo,
birthplace of local nineteenth-century hero, Andreas Hofer.
Castel Tirolo
Schlossweg 24, Tirol • Mid-March to early Dec Tues–Sun 10am–5pm, Aug until 6pm; guided tours in German at 10.15am & 2pm, Italian at
11.30am & 3.15pm; English by prior arrangement • €7 • T0473 220 221, Wschlosstirol.it
On the northern outskirts of Merano, the beautiful twelfth-century Castel Tirolo houses
an interesting museum on daily life in the Middle Ages. Such was the influence of its
owners, the Counts of Tirol, that the whole Tyrol region takes its name from the castle.
Below it is Brunnenburg, a neo-Gothic pile of fishtail battlements and conical towers,
where American poet Ezra Pound spent the last years of his life.
Museum Passeier
Via Passiria 72, San Leonardo • Mid-March to June & Oct to early Nov Tues–Sun 10am–6pm; Aug & Sept daily 10am–6pm • €8 •
Wmuseum.passeier.it • Bus #240 from Merano (every 30min; 35min)
San Leonardo (Sankt Leonhard), some 20km to the north of Merano, is the birthplace
of Andreas Hofer. Originally an innkeeper, wine merchant and cattle dealer, Hofer
fought for the Tyrol’s return to Austria after it had been ceded to Bavaria in 1805,
becoming a hero of the people after successful uprisings against occupying Bavarian
and Napoleonic troops. However, larger political forces overtook him and Hofer was
339
5
PARCO NAZIONALE DELLO STELVIO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
arrested in 1810 and executed under Napoleon’s orders in Mantua. His birthplace now
houses the small Museum Passeier, dedicated to Hofer.
Val d’Ultimo (Ultental)
A traditional place of hiding in an area renowned for mountain warfare, the Val
d’Ultimo (Ultental) to the southwest of Merano remained relatively isolated and closed
to outsiders until the early twentieth century. The road into the valley begins its ascent
just south of Merano at LANA and ends at the remote village of SANTA GERTRUDE
(Sankt Gertraud), the terminus for buses along the valley. From here trails (3hr) lead
over rock-strewn moorland to Rifugio Canziani aka Höchster Hütte (T0473 798 120;
mid-June to mid-Oct), surrounded by the glaciers and peaks of Gioveretto
(Zufrittspitze). The valley is also a good place for shorter walks, using Santa Gertrude
as a base. Buses from Merano and Lana make the trip along the valley.
Parco Nazionale dello Stelvio
The Parco Nazionale dello Stelvio (or the Stilfser National Park) is one of Italy’s major
national parks: it extends north to the Swiss Engadine and southwest into Lombardy
and covers the whole Ortles (Ortler) mountain range. The park is topped by one of
Europe’s largest glaciers (the Ghiacciaio dei Forni) and crossed by the Passo dello
Stelvio (2758m), which misses being the highest pass in the Alps by just 12m.
Ski tourism has made its mark, and the park is as crisscrossed by lifts as anywhere in
the Alps, but it’s still a remarkable place. People come here for the high trails and
glacier skiing in summer, or for the chance of seeing wildlife such as the red and roe
deer, elk, chamois, golden eagle and ibex. A railway line running from Merano to
Malles and connecting buses from stations along the way into the side valleys makes all
places of interest below easily accessible.
The Val Venosta (Vinschgau)
Extending west from Merano, the Val Venosta (Vinschgau) is the main approach to the
Stelvio park, and while it’s often busy with traffic a rural feel remains away from the
road. Every weekend during July and August, one or other of the villages holds a
summer street festival, with live music, beer gardens and fresh produce. One of the
best is the Marmor e Marillen (Marble and Apricots) in early August in the tiny village
of Laas, when you can sample marillenknödel – sweet potato dumplings filled with
whole apricots and rolled in sugar and breadcrumbs.
Forest
At the beginning of the valley the village of Forest (Forst) is dominated by the Forst
brewery, whose hop-scented brews you can knock back throughout South Tyrol.
Guided tours of the brewery run every Wednesday at 2pm between April and October
in German, and every Thursday at 2pm between June and September in Italian (no
tours in English). Call ahead (T0473 260 111, Wforst.it) to book a place.
Castello Juval
Late March to June & Sept to early Nov Thurs–Tues 10am–4pm • €9 • T0471 631 264, Wmessner-mountain-museum.it
At the Vinschgau village of Kastelbell, the dramatic Castello Juval, dating from the
thirteenth century, houses another branch of the Messner Mountain Museum and is
also the summer residence of the famous mountaineer Reinhold Messner. Inside, there’s
a superb collection of Tibetica, an assembly of paintings depicting the world’s holy
peaks and an Expedition Cellar packed with old climbing gear that’s been to some
pretty lonely places, as well as a reasonable osteria.
Glorenza
The ancient walled village of GLORENZA (Glurns), 2.5km before the railway ends at
Malles, has a population of less than nine hundred, but still enjoys special privileges
conferred in 1294 when it was a salt-trading centre. An architectural gem, the
settlement boasts numerous porticoes and merchants’ houses dating back to the
sixteenth century, as well as well-preserved defences.
Churburg
Visits are by 1hr guided tour (every 15min; mid-March to Oct Tues–Sun 10am–noon & 2–4.30pm) • €8 • Wchurburg.com
End of the line for the railway comes at Malles (Mals) where the castle at Coira, more
frequently known by its German name of Churburg, was owned by the lords of Matsch at
the beginning of the thirteenth century. Back then, it was just one castle in a whole chain
stretching from Bavaria to just north of Milan and was battled over by various knights
– their suits of armour, some weighing nearly 25kg, can be seen in the armoury.
The side valleys
Three main side valleys thread their way from the Val Venosta into the foothills of the
Ortles range: the Val Martello (Martelltal), the Val di Trafoi (Trafoiertal) and the Val di
Solda (Suldental).
Val Martello
Buses run regularly from Goldrain into the stunning VAL MARTELLO (Martelltal), passing
silver birch woods, the ruins of Castel Montani and an aviary for falcons at Morter along
the way. At the head of the valley, Paradiso del Cevedale (2088m) is one of the busiest
bases for climbers and cross-country skiers, lying close to Monte Cevedale (Zufallspitze;
3769m); other trails lead across high passes to Val d’Ultimo and Val di Solda.
Val di Trafoi
TRAFOI is a beautifully situated hamlet perched at 1543m by the side of the road
towards the beginning of the main climb up to the Stelvio Pass. The uninterrupted
views of the mighty Ortles are stupendous, and the slopes remarkably unsullied by
tourism. A cable car makes the ascent from Trafoi to Rifugio Forcola (no
accommodation) at 2250m, from where a fine path (4hr) continues up and round to
the pass which until 1918 marked the frontier between Italy, Switzerland and Austria.
On your way, you pass the Pizzo Garibaldi (Dreisprachenspitze), a spur of rock that’s
the symbolic meeting place for the three main languages of the area.
Val di Solda
The isolated Val di Solda is a tributary valley off the Val di Trafoi. At its head lies the

CROSSING THE PASSO DELLO STELVIO
The white-knuckle drive across the Ortles mountains over the Passo dello Stelvio (Stelvio
Pass) to Bormio follows a convoluted route consisting of 48 switchbacks and turns. Motorbikers
love the thrill and the views while cyclists see the climb as the ultimate challenge – it’s often
an important stage of the Girò d’Italia. It’s one of the last Alpine passes to open to traffic each
year, sometimes staying closed until July if there’s been a late fall of snow. You can access the
pass by bus from Malles, one early morning, the other mid-afternoon.
The end point of the route, Bormio, is a rather snooty resort with a sprawl of hotels in its
cobblestoned core. The visitor centre at Via Roma 131/B (May, Oct & Nov Mon–Sat
9am–12.30pm & 3–6.30pm, Sun 9am–12.30pm; July & Aug daily 9am–1pm & 2.30–7pm; Sept,
June & Dec–April daily 9am–12.30pm & 3–6.30pm; T0342 903 300, Wbormio.eu) can advise
on accommodation as well as nature trails in the southern reaches of the Stelvio national park.

341
5
PARCO NAZIONALE DELLO STELVIO TRENTINOALTO ADIGE
hamlet of SOLDA (Sulden), a major climbing and skiing centre since the nineteenth
century. Here, a small museum, in the same building as the school by the Post Hotel
(daily 10am–10pm; €3), celebrates Solda’s existence as a mountain resort, displaying
photos and finds from local glaciers. Nearby, the MMM Ortles ice museum (Wed–Mon:
late May to mid-Oct & mid-Dec to April 2–6pm; July & Aug 1–7pm; T0473 613 577,
Wmessner-mountain-museum.it; €6) is a branch of Reinhold Messner’s network of
mountain museums. As well as exhibits on the nearby glaciers of the Ortles, the highlight
is a jagged skylight giving the impression you’re at the bottom of a crevasse, looking up.
Although Solda attracts fairly serious climbers and skiers, there are also easy paths
(2hr) up to Rifugio-Albergo Città di Milano at 2581m (Schaubachhütte; T0473 613
024; late June to early Oct & Dec–May), plus more difficult trails (3hr 30min) to
Rifugio Payer at 3029m (Payerhütte; T0473 613 010; mid-June to Sept), a fantastic
viewpoint and base for the ascent of Ortles (Ortler). At 3905m high, it was the tallest
mountain of the old Austrian Empire before the border changed, and was once marked
on local maps as “The End of the World”.
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE PARCO NAZIONALE DELLO STELVIO
If you don’t have your own vehicle, train is the easiest way to travel along the Val Venosta, from where you can access the
park. Bus services run from the railway line into the side valleys of Martello, Trafoi and Solda.
By train The privately operated Vinschgaubahn/Ferrovia
della Val Venosta runs every 30min between Merano and
Malles (Mals) and gives access to several villages along the
valley, connecting with local bus services. Trains also carry
bicycles for an additional fee.
By bus There are services from Merano to Castelbello
(hourly; 50min) and Silandro (4 daily; 1hr); from Malles to
Glorenza (hourly; 5min); from Spondinig to Trafoi (6 daily;
45–50min) and Solda (hourly; 50min); and from Goldrain
to Martello (hourly; 20min).
INFORMATION
Tourist offices There are offices at Solda, Via Principale 72
(Mon–Sat 9am–noon & 3–6pm; T0473 613 015,
Wortlergebiet.it); Silandro, Kapuzinerstrasse 10 (Mon–Fri
8.30am–12.30pm & 2–6pm, Sat 8.30am–12.30pm;
T0473 730 155, Wvinschgau.net); and Malles, Via S.
Benedetto 1 (July & Aug daily 8.30am–noon & 3–6pm;
Sept–June Mon–Fri 8.30am–noon & 3–6pm, Sat 8.30am–
noon; T0473 831 190, Wvinschgau.it).
Website For general information on the area, visit
Wstelviopark.bz.it.
ACCOMMODATION
PRATO ALLO STELVIO
Residence Sägemühle Via delle Spine/Dornweg 12
T0473 616 078, Wsaegemuehle.it. A stylish campsite
and residence that has pitches as well as welcoming rooms
and apartments (€98) with rustic wooden interiors and
modern amenities. There’s an indoor swimming pool, too.
Doubles €75, pitch €16.50 plus €12 per person
GLORENZA
Hotel Gasthof Grüner Baum Piazza della Città/
Stadtplatz 7 T0473 831 206, Wgasthofgruenerbaum
.it. This lovely sixteenth-century hotel on Glorenza’s main
square has been sensitively restored in minimalist style,
with brass lamps and white oiled wood. The rooftop lounge
has views over to the Ortler region. €125
TRAFOI
Hotel Bella Vista Dorf 17 T0473 611 716, Wbellavista.
it. This welcoming, family-friendly hotel has
spacious panoramic rooms, and food is served in a
pleasant dining room that opens onto an inviting garden
with stunning views of the mountains. Compulsory half
board €160
SOLDA
Hotel Nives Haupstrasse 71 T0473 613 422,
Wsulden-nives.com. Right in the heart of town, this
hotel with attached pizzeria and café has great-value
modern rooms; the doubles are spacious with wooden
interiors and spotless en-suite bathrooms, though the
Basecamp rooms with bunk beds (sleeping four) are a
squeeze. There’s a small living area with armchairs in the
hallway. €75
Hotel Post Strada Principale 24 T0473 613 024,
Whotelpost.it. Perched above town, this hotel has a
particularly inviting rustic spa with Alpine touches
including a little wooden bridge and two water wells; there
are lovely views from the panoramic terrace overlooking
the region’s highest mountain. Standard rooms feature
wooden interiors or four-poster beds. €157
