Montjuïc
	fortress
	Olympic stadium 
	MNAC, the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya
	Fundació Joan Miró
Barceloneta
	restaurant quarter
Parc de la Ciutadella
Port Olímpic
Gràcia
	small squares, lively bars
	Park Güell
monastery of Montserrat




< Back to Barcelona







========NEW
Shopping, etc
	You’ll probably do most of your eating where you do most
	While not on a par with Paris or the world’s other style capitals







< Back to Barcelona


!!!
Eixample
	as Barcelona grew more prosperous throughout the nineteenth century, it was clear that the city had to expand beyond the Barri Gòtic. The winning plan in a contest to design the city’s new quarters was that of utopian engineer and urban planner Ildefons Cerdà i Sunyer, who drew up a grid-shaped town marching off to the north, intersected by long, straight streets and cut by broad, angled avenues. A new class of architects began to pepper the Eixample with ever more striking examples of their work, inspired by modernisme, the Catalan offshoot of Art Nouveau
	
	Rambla de Catalunya
	
	Sagrada Família
	
	modernista architectural wonders
	
		!!!
		La Pedrera aka Casa Mila
			book in advance
				you have to reserve for a specific date and time; if you’re not sure of your timings, booking a “premium” ticket means you can visit at any time within a month of whatever date you choose. Those arriving without reservations can jump the queue by paying €7 extra for a premium ticket on the spot
			
			self-guided daytime tours: 9am–8.30pm
				€22		
			premium tickets
				€29
			
			guided tours noon & 4pm
				€25
				
			Gaudí’s Pedrera: The Origins 
				Mon–Thurs & Sun 9–11pm
					€34
				Fri & Sat 10.15–11pm
					€49
					
			Day/Night ticket
				€41
			
			Gaudí’s La Pedrera (or the Stone Quarry) apartment building
			
			Pere Milà had married the older and far richer Roser Guardiola, the widow of Josep Guardiola, and clearly knew how to spend his new wife’s money. Milà was one of the city’s first car owners and Gaudí built parking space into this building, itself a first
			
			facade is said to have been inspired by the mountain of Montserrat
			apartments themselves, whose balconies of tangled metal drip over the facade, resemble eroded cave dwellings
			
			visitors only get to see a small proportion of the building, as most of the apartments are still privately occupied
				you step first into the larger of two oval interior courtyards, from which a closed-off staircase leads up to the lush first-floor home of the building’s original owners. You’re directed instead into an elevator that climbs straight up to its crowning glory, the extraordinary terrat or roof terrace (which may be closed if it’s raining)
				
				the roof is the most extraordinary element, with its giant chimney pots looking like multicoloured medieval knights. As you stroll around the rooftop, taking in the superb views, you’ll notice the arches in two of the larger structures perfectly frame such landmarks as the Sagrada Família

				the one apartment included on the tour itineraries, El Pis (simply, “the apartment”) on the fourth floor, re-creates the design and style of a modernista-era bourgeois apartment in a series of extraordinarily light rooms that flow seamlessly each to the next. They’re filled with period furniture and effects, while the moulded door and window frames, and even the brass door handles, bear witness to Gaudí’s ergonomic sense of design		
				
			excellent exhibition on Gaudí’s life and work has been installed beneath the 270 curved brick arches of the attic immediately below. All his major Barcelona buildings are covered, in displays that illustrate how he drew his inspiration from natural forms like python skeletons, pumpkins and seashells
			
			this was Gaudi's final secular commission, and even here he was injecting religious motifs and sculptures until its owners told him to remove them. Alarmed by the anti-religious fervour of the “Tragic Week” in Barcelona in 1909, when anarchist-sponsored rioting destroyed churches and religious foundations – and the disinterred corpses of nuns were deposited on the doorstep of Gaudí’s Palau Güell – they forbade him to add the sculpture of the Virgin Mary with which he planned to complete the roof. Gaudí, by now working full-time on the Sagrada Família, resigned from the project in disgust, and resolved to use his skills exclusively for religious purposes in future		
		
		Mansana de la Discòrdia, or “Block of Discord” - three gems by the three top architects of the period
			casa Lleó Morera
			!!!
			Casa Amatller
				free to wander into the foyer and admire the staircase and lift
				
				half-hour tours 10am, 10.30am, 11.30am, 12.30pm, 1pm, 1.30pm, 2pm, 2.30pm, 3pm, 3.30pm, 4pm, 4.30pm, 5.30pm, 6pm
				1hr tours 11am (English)
				reservations advised
				regular half-hour tour
					€14
				half-hour tours at 4.30pm & 6pm include cup of hot chocolate
					€17
				1hr tour
					€17
						
				designed for Antoni Amatller, a chocolate manufacturer, art collector, photographer and traveller
				
				triumph of decorative detail - pillared foyer and staircase lit by stained glass are like the inside of some romantic castle
			!!!
			Casa Batlló
				9am–9pm
				€25
				buy tickets in advance, in person or online
				
				aka “House of Bones”

				Antoni Gaudí’s Casa Batlló (pronounced by-o) was designed for industrialist Josep Batlló
				
				original apartment building, built in 1877, was considered dull, so Gaudí was hired to give it a face-lift
				
				interior is every bit as compelling, meaning that despite the crowds and high prices, the self-guided tours should absolutely not be missed
					
					staircase wafts you to the 1st floor, where everything swirls in the main salon: the ceiling twists into a whirlpool-like vortex around its sun-like lamp; the doors, window and skylights are dreamy waves of wood and coloured glass in mollusc-like shapes. The sense of light and space here is extraordinary thanks to the wall-length window onto Passeig de Gràcia.
					
					there’s barely a straight line in the entire building
					
					roofscape is described as representing the spine of the dragon killed by Sant Jordi (St George), and the small tower holding a three-dimensional cross as the knight’s lance, plunged into the dragon’s back
					
				audioguides are excellent, pointing out details you might otherwise overlook, and offering “augmented-reality” views of how the place looked when new and first lived in. They culminate when you emerge on the rooftop to find yourself surrounded by colourful chimneys, crusted with mosaics and broken tiles		
	
	
	
	Torre Agbar 
	Disseny Hub, applied art collections
	
	


!!!
Sagrada Família
	9am–8pm
	€15
	with audioguide €22
	with guided tour €24
		4–5 guided 50min tours in English daily
	with audioguide and towers €29
	
	consecrated as a basilica by Pope Benedict
	also a building site, with all the cacophony
		out of its planned eighteen spires, only the smallest eight had been completed, in the form of four “Apostles” grouped on each of the Nativity and Passion facades. That leaves four Apostles still to build on the Glory facade; four Evangelists; and one spire each for the Virgin Mary and Jesus Christ
		
		surmounted by a giant cross, the central Jesus Christ will be the tallest of all, at 172.5m, thereby making the Sagrada Família the tallest church in the world

	begun in 1882 by public subscription, the Sagrada Família was intended by its progenitor, Catalan publisher Josep Bocabella, as an expiatory building to atone for the revolutionary ideas then at large in Barcelona. Original architect Francesc de Paula Villar planned a modest church in an orthodox neo-Gothic style. Two years later, however, after arguments between the two men, the 31-year-old Antoni Gaudí took over as Architect Director, and changed the direction and scale of the project almost immediately, seeing in the Sagrada Família an opportunity to reflect his own deepening spiritual and nationalist feelings
	
		Initial work was slow. It took four years, until 1901, to finish the crypt, while the first full plan was only published in 1917. Gaudí himself vowed never to work on secular projects again, and devoted the rest of his life to the Sagrada Família. The more rigid his devotion to his Catholic faith grew, however, the more unfettered his architectural imagination became, while always rooted in functionality and strict attention to detail.
		
		Antoni Gaudí eventually moved to live in a small studio on the Sagrada Família site, until he was run over by a tram on the Gran Via on June 7, 1926. Initially unrecognized, he died in hospital three days later. His death was treated as a Catalan national disaster, and all of Barcelona turned out for his funeral procession, after which he was buried in the Sagrada Família crypt. Only one facade of the Sagrada Família was then complete. Work stalled during the Civil War, with most of Gaudí’s plans and models lost in the turmoil.
		
		Construction finally restarted, amid great controversy, during the 1950s, and is financed by private funding and ticket sales. Gaudí’s own plans have been followed wherever possible, but critics accuse his successors of infringing his original spirit. Computer-aided design and high-tech construction techniques have so greatly speeded up the processes involved, however, that the debate is effectively over. Even if the builders fail to meet their current target of finishing the church to mark the centenary of Gaudí’s death in 2026, no doubt remains that the Sagrada Família will be completed in the near future.

	Visiting the Basilica
All Sagrada Família tickets are for a specific date and time. Buy yours online as far in advance as possible; in summer, you’ve very little chance of simply turning up and being able to get in. Aim to visit early in the day, to beat the crowds. If you’re lucky, you may coincide with an English-language tour, though the audioguides provide substantially the same information. However you visit, you’ll start by circling the exterior. The eastern Nativity facade, facing C/de la Marina, was the first to be completed and is alive with fecund detail, its very columns resting on giant tortoises. Contrast this with the Cubist austerity of the western Passion facade (C/de Sardenya), where the brutal story of the Crucifixion is played out across the harsh mountain stone.
The interior of the Basilica is an immense, peaceful and uncluttered space. Every bit as “luminous” as Gaudí dreamed, it’s a forest, filled with the light that streams through its stained-glass windows, where the columns are the trees that bear the weight of the structure. Separate elevators climb the towers on the Passion and Nativity facades. As well as a close-up look at the spires themselves, you’ll be rewarded by views of the city through an extraordinary jumble of latticed stonework, ceramic decoration, carved buttresses and sculpture.
The museum
Sagrada Família tickets also cover the excellent museum that extends through its lower level, and traces Gaudí’s career, with models and diagrams to explain the symbolism of the church. You can also peer down at his actual tomb in the crypt, and watch sculptors at work in the plaster workshop.




Basilica de la Sagrada Família

ANTONI GAUDÍ AND THE SAGRADA FAMÍLIA

	Visiting the Basilica
All tickets to enter the Sagrada Família are for a specific date and time. Buy yours online as far in advance as possible; in summer, you’ve very little chance of simply turning up and being able to get in. And if you want to go up one of the towers, book that as well – numbers are even more restricted, and even when tickets to the church itself are available at the gate, you may have to wait several hours for the next available slot for the towers.
Aim to visit as early in the day as possible, to beat the crowds. If you’re lucky, you may coincide with an English-language tour. Failing that, you can get substantially the same information on the audio-guides. Whether you visit with a guide or by yourself, you’ll start by circling the outside of the church. The eastern Nativity facade, facing C/Marina, was the first to be completed and is alive with fecund detail, its very columns resting on the backs of giant tortoises, and a green, almost-kitsch Christmas tree, flecked with white doves, adorning its apex. Contrast this with the Cubist austerity of Subirachs’ work on the western Passion facade (C/Sardenya), where the brutal story of the Crucifixion is played out across the harsh mountain stone, each scene with the relevant Bible verse inscribed immediately below.
The interior of the Basilica is an immense, peaceful and uncluttered space which thanks to Gaudí’s innovative use of hyperboloids is every bit as “luminous” as he dreamed. Gaudí envisaged it as essentially a forest, filled with the light that streams through its stained-glass windows, with its columns as the trees that bear the weight of the structure down to the foundations. At the heart of it all, the main altar is positively drenched in natural light.
Separate elevators climb the towers on the Passion and Nativity facades. As well as a close-up look at the spires themselves, you’ll be rewarded by partial views of the city through an extraordinary jumble of latticed stonework, ceramic decoration, carved buttresses and sculpture.

INTERIOR, SAGRADA FAMÍLIA

The museum
Tickets to the Sagrada Família also offer access to the excellent museum that extends through most of its lower level, and traces Gaudí’s career, with models and diagrams to explain the construction and symbolism of the church. Some of Gaudí’s original drawings are displayed in dim light, as well as photos of him escorting various dignitaries around the site, and of his funeral. You can also peer down at his actual tomb in the crypt, and watch sculptors and model-makers at work in the plaster workshop.








TOP SIGHT
LA SAGRADA FAMÍLIA

The Temple Expiatori de la Sagrada Família (Expiatory Temple of the Holy Family) was Antoni Gaudí’s all-consuming obsession. Given the commission by a conservative society that wished to build a temple as atonement for the city’s sins of modernity, Gaudí saw its completion as his holy mission. As funds dried up, he contributed his own, and in the last years of his life he was never shy of pleading with anyone he thought a likely donor.
Gaudí devised a temple 95m long and 60m wide, able to seat 13,000 people, with a central tower 170m high above the transept (representing Christ) and another 17 of 100m or more. The 12 along the three facades represent the Apostles, while the remaining five represent the Virgin Mary and the four evangelists. With his characteristic dislike for straight lines (there were none in nature, he said), Gaudí gave his towers swelling outlines inspired by the weird peaks of the holy mountain Montserrat outside Barcelona, and encrusted them with a tangle of sculpture that seems an outgrowth of the stone.
At Gaudí’s death, only the crypt, the apse walls, one portal and one tower had been finished. Three more towers were added by 1930, completing the northeast (Nativity) facade. In 1936 anarchists burned and smashed the interior, including workshops, plans and models. Work began again in 1952, but controversy has always clouded progress. Opponents of the continuation of the project claim that the computer models based on what little of Gaudí’s plans survived the anarchists’ ire have led to the creation of a monster that has little to do with Gaudí’s plans and style. It is a debate that appears to have little hope of resolution. Like or hate what is being done, the fascination it awakens is undeniable.
Even before reaching completion, some of the oldest parts of the church, especially the apse, have required restoration work.
The Interior & the Apse
Inside, work on roofing over the church was completed in 2010. The roof is held up by a forest of extraordinary angled pillars. As the pillars soar towards the ceiling, they sprout a web of supporting branches, creating the effect of a forest canopy. The tree image is in no way fortuitous – Gaudí envisaged such an effect. Everything was thought through, including the shape and placement of windows to create the mottled effect one would see with sunlight pouring through the branches of a thick forest. The pillars are of four different types of stone. They vary in colour and load-bearing strength, from the soft Montjuïc stone pillars along the lateral aisles through to granite, dark grey basalt and finally burgundy-tinged Iranian porphyry for the key columns at the intersection of the nave and transept. The stained glass, divided in shades of red, blue, green and ochre, creates a hypnotic, magical atmosphere when the sun hits the windows. Tribunes built high above the aisles can host two choirs: the main tribune up to 1300 people and the children’s tribune up to 300.
Nativity Facade
The Nativity Facade is the artistic pinnacle of the building, mostly created under Gaudí’s personal supervision. You can climb high up inside some of the four towers by a combination of lifts and narrow spiral staircases – a vertiginous experience. Do not climb the stairs if you have cardiac or respiratory problems. The towers are destined to hold tubular bells capable of playing complex music at great volume. Their upper parts are decorated with mosaics spelling out ‘Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Hosanna in Excelsis, Amen, Alleluia’. Asked why he lavished so much care on the tops of the spires, which no one would see from close up, Gaudí answered: ‘The angels will see them.’
Three sections of the portal represent, from left to right, Hope, Charity and Faith. Among the forest of sculpture on the Charity portal you can see, low down, the manger surrounded by an ox, an ass, the shepherds and kings, and angel musicians. Some 30 different species of plant from around Catalonia are reproduced here, and the faces of the many figures are taken from plaster casts done of local people and the occasional one made from corpses in the local morgue.
Directly above the blue stained-glass window is the archangel Gabriel’s Annunciation to Mary. At the top is a green cypress tree, a refuge in a storm for the white doves of peace dotted over it. The mosaic work at the pinnacle of the towers is made from Murano glass from Venice.
To the right of the facade is the curious Claustre del Roser, a Gothic-style mini-cloister tacked on to the outside of the church (rather than the classic square enclosure of the great Gothic church monasteries). Once inside, look back to the intricately decorated entrance. On the lower right-hand side you’ll notice the sculpture of a reptilian devil handing a terrorist a bomb. Barcelona was regularly rocked by political violence, and bombings were frequent in the decades prior to the civil war. The sculpture is one of several on the ‘temptations of men and women’.
Passion Facade
The southwest Passion Facade, on the theme of Christ’s last days and death, was built between 1954 and 1978 based on surviving drawings by Gaudí, with four towers and a large, sculpture-bedecked portal. The sculptor, Josep Subirachs, worked on its decoration from 1986 to 2006. He did not attempt to imitate Gaudí, instead producing angular, controversial images of his own. The main series of sculptures, on three levels, are in an S-shaped sequence, starting with the Last Supper at the bottom left and ending with Christ’s burial at the top right.
To the right, in front of the Passion Facade, the Escoles de Gaudí is one of his simpler gems. Gaudí built this as a children’s school, creating an original, undulating roof of brick that continues to charm architects to this day. Inside is a re-creation of Gaudí’s modest office as it was when he died, and explanations of the geometric patterns and plans at the heart of his building techniques.
Glory Facade
The Glory Facade will, like the others, be crowned by four towers – the total of 12 representing the Twelve Apostles. Gaudí wanted it to be the most magnificent facade of the church. Inside will be the narthex, a kind of foyer made up of 16 ‘lanterns’, a series of hyperboloid forms topped by cones. Further decoration will make the whole building a microcosmic symbol of the Christian church, with Christ represented by a massive 170m central tower above the transept, and the five remaining planned towers symbolising the Virgin Mary and the four evangelists.
Museu Gaudí
Open at the same times as the church, the Museu Gaudí, below ground level, includes interesting material on Gaudí’s life and other works, as well as models and photos of La Sagrada Família. You can see a good example of his plumb-line models that showed him the stresses and strains he could get away with in construction. A side hall towards the eastern end of the museum leads to a viewing point above the simple crypt in which the genius is buried. The crypt, where Masses are now held, can also be visited from the Carrer de Mallorca side of the church.
A HIDDEN PORTRAIT

Careful observation of the Passion Facade will reveal a special tribute from sculptor Josep Subirachs to Gaudí. The central sculptural group (below Christ crucified) shows, from right to left, Christ bearing his cross, Veronica displaying the cloth with Christ’s bloody image, a pair of soldiers and, watching it all, a man called the evangelist. Subirachs used a rare photo of Gaudí, taken a couple of years before his death, as the model for the evangelist’s face.
VISITORS

Unfinished it may be, but La Sagrada Família attracts over 4.5 million visitors a year and is the most visited monument in Spain. Pope Benedict XVI consecrated it as a minor basilica in a huge ceremony in November 2010.











Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau
C/de Sant Antoni María Claret 167, at C/-de la Independència • April–Oct Mon–Sat 10am–6.30pm, Sun 10am–2.30pm; Nov–March Mon–Sat 10am–4.30pm, Sun 10am–2.30pm; 1hr 15min English-language tours daily all year 11am • Self-guided €14, guided €19; under-12s free • 932 537 801, santpaubarcelona.org • Hospital de Sant Pau
Lluís Domènech i Montaner’s modernista public hospital, the Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau, is possibly Barcelona’s one piece of architecture that can rival the Sagrada Família for size and invention. A huge precinct of dazzling Art Nouveau imagination, devoted to secular rather than spiritual ends, it has its own metro stop, but it’s better to approach by walking up the four-block Avinguda de Gaudí from the Sagrada Família, which gives terrific views back over the church.
Domènech i Montaner started work on the project in 1902, to replace the medieval Santa Creu hospital in the Raval. He created an astonishing complex of pavilions, at once practical and playful, topped by golden-tiled domes, festooned with turrets and towers, and covered with sculpture, mosaics, stained glass and ironwork. The hospital finally closed in 2009, with its patients moving to an adjoining new hospital, and the complex reopened in 2014. Of the 48 pavilions Domènech i Montaner originally envisaged, 27 were completed; twelve now constitute a World Heritage Site, of which six have so far benefitted from a €100 million restoration programme. While still primarily noteworthy for their exterior decoration, they’re being filled with display panels and exhibits, some of which explain the details and history of the ensemble. The pick of the bunch, the main administration building, has an ornate Gothic-style chapel upstairs, kitted out with Art Nouveau tiles and floral mosaics.

---
Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes
Glòries
Barcelona’s major avenues all meet at the Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes, a glorified roundabout dedicated to the “Catalan glories”, from architecture to literature. Long a focal point for the city’s regeneration plans, it’s been undergoing work for several years now, with the ultimate intention being to tunnel traffic underground, and open up a grand pedestrianized park centring on the Museu del Disseny. Signature buildings hereabouts include Jean Nouvel’s cigar-shaped Torre Agbar (142m), a highly distinctive aluminium-and-glass tower with no fewer than four thousand windows, housing the headquarters of the local water company.

?
Museu del Disseny
Pl. de les Glòries Catalanes 37–38 • Tues–Sun 10am–8pm • €6, under-16s free; free for everyone Sun 3–8pm & all day on first Sun of month • 932 566 800, museudeldisseny.cat • Glòries
Barcelona’s showpiece Museu del Disseny (Design Museum) gathers the former collections of its decorative arts, ceramics, textile and clothing, and its graphic arts museums, into a single, stunning new building, the Disseny Hub, which, thanks to its distinctive shape, is widely known as “The Stapler”. Of its four floors, the first most closely corresponds to what you might expect of a design museum, displaying everyday objects, largely of Catalan origin, that range from chairs, tables and bicycles to toilets and, yes, staplers. The second holds a random but beautiful assortment of decorative arts from the third century onwards, starting with Coptic textiles from Egypt and winding up with ceramic works by Picasso and Miró. Next comes a floor devoted to fashion, illustrating how clothing has successively increased, reduced, accentuated and revealed various body shapes over the past five centuries, while the top floor traces the history of graphic design in twentieth-century Barcelona.

?
Teatre Nacional de Catalunya
Pl. de les Arts 1 • guided tours Wed & Thurs 11am & 12.30pm; €8; reservations required • 933 065 747, visites@tnc.cat, tnc.cat • Glòries or tram T4
Designed by local architect Ricardo Bofill and inaugurated in 1997, the Teatre Nacional de Catalunya – Catalunya’s national theatre, southwest of Glòries – is a soaring, postmodern glass box, encased within a faux-Greek temple. Reserve ahead, and you can take an hour-long guided backstage tour, while a summer evening’s drink on the open-air terrassa is a nice way to take in the grandiose surroundings.

?
TREASURE-HUNTING AT ELS ENCANTS VELLS
A treasure-trove of dusty delights, Barcelona’s flea market, El Encants Vells, is adjacent to the Teatre Nacional de Catalunya at Avgda. Meridiana 69 (Mon, Wed, Fri & Sat 9am–8pm, plus public auctions Mon, Wed & Fri 7.15–8.30am; encantsbcn.com; Glòries). Several levels of open-air treasure-hunting action are protected by a gleaming metallic canopy.
Despite its recent move into this shiny new home, the market retains its street-bazaar vibe. You name it, you can buy it: old sewing machines, cheese graters, photograph albums, cutlery, lawnmowers, clothes, shoes, CDs, antiques, furniture and out-and-out junk. It’s best in the early morning, and while haggling for any “old charms” (encants vells) you might fancy is de rigueur, note that you’re up against experts.

?!
L’Auditori and the Museu de la Música
L’Auditori C/de Lepant 150 • auditori.cat Museu de la Música C/de Padilla 155 • Tues, Wed & Fri 10am–6pm, Thurs 10am–9pm, Sat & Sun 10am–7pm • €6, under-16s free; free for everyone Sun 3–7pm & all day on first Sun of month • 932 563 650, www.museumusica.bcn.cat • Glòries/Marina
Forming a sort of cultural enclave, L’Auditori is the city’s contemporary city concert hall, within which is housed the Museu de la Música. It’s all very impressive, with soaring glass-walled display cases, and yet it struggles to engage, partly because of the sheer number and variety of instruments and partly because of the impenetrable commentary, with sections called things like “The humanist spirit and the predominance of polyphony”.

???
Parc Joan Miró
C/de Tarragona 74 • Daily 10am–dusk • Free • Tarragona
Laid out on the site of Barcelona’s nineteenth-century municipal slaughterhouse, on the left-hand side of the Eixample, the Parc Joan Miró features a raised piazza marked only by Joan Miró’s gigantic mosaic sculpture Dona i Ocell (“Woman and Bird”), towering above a shallow reflecting pool. The rear of the park is given over to games areas and landscaped sections of palms and firs, with a kiosk café and outdoor tables among the trees.

?
Arenas de Barcelona
Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 373–385, at Pl. d’Espanya • Daily 10am–10pm • 932 890 244, arenasdebarcelona.com • Espanya
The Arenas de Barcelona, a fabulous Moorish-style bullring, was built in 1900 but has been reimagined as a swish shopping and leisure centre. Conceived by architect Richard Rogers, and preserving its beautiful brick exterior, the retail levels at Arenas are hung in sweeping, circular galleries, while on top a wide walk-around promenade circles the dome, offering 360-degree views of the city’s western side.
< Back to Barcelona







Montjuïc
It takes at least a day to see Montjuïc, the steep hill and park that rises over Barcelona to the southwest. There’s been a castle on the heights since the mid-seventeenth century, but since being chosen to host the International Exhibition of 1929, Montjuïc has effectively become a cultural leisure park, anchored around the unsurpassed national collection of Catalan art in the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC). This is complemented by two other superb galleries, namely the international contemporary art in the CaixaForum and the showcase for Catalan artist Joan Miró in the Fundació Joan Miró. In addition, Montjuïc holds separate archeological, ethnological, military and theatrical museums, as well as structures and stadiums from the 1992 Olympics.

arrival and getting around: Montjuïc
By Metro For easy access to Caixa Forum, Poble Espanyol and MNAC, use Espanya (follow exit signs for “Fira/Exposició”).
By funicular The Funicular de Montjuïc departs from inside the metro station at Paral.lel and takes a couple of minutes to ascend the hill (every 10min: April–Oct Mon–Fri 7.30am–10pm, Sat, Sun & hols 9am–10pm; Nov–March Mon–Fri 7.30am–8pm, Sat, Sun & hols 9am–8pm; €2.15, transport tickets and passes valid; tmb.cat). From the upper station on Avgda. de Miramar, you can switch to the Montjuïc cable car or bus services, or walk in around 5min to the Fundació Joan Miró, 20min to the MNAC.
By Telefèric de Montjuïc Starting from Avgda. de Miramar across from the higher Funicular de Montjuïc station, this separate cable car serves as a complement to the funicular, carrying passengers in eight-seater gondolas up to the castle (daily: March–May & Oct 10am–7pm; June–Sept 10am–-9pm; Nov–Feb 10am–6pm; €8.20 one-way/€12.50 return, under-12s €6.50/9, under-4s free; tmb.cat).
Transbordador Aeri The cross-harbour Transbordador Aeri cable car crosses high above Barcelona’s harbour, all the way from Barceloneta to the Jardins de Miramar (every 15min; daily: March–May & mid-Sept to Oct 10.30am–7pm; June to mid-Sept 10.30am–8pm; Nov 11am–7pm; Dec–Feb 11am–5.30pm; €11 one-way/€16.50 return; 934 304 716, telefericodebarcelona.com). From there it’s a 10min walk to the Montjuïc cable car and funicular stations, another 5min to the Fundació Joan Miró.
Bus City bus #150 (transport tickets and passes valid) loops around the main Montjuïc attractions, departing from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina, outside Espanya. The sightseeing, hop-on-hop-off Bus Turístic follows a similar route.

!!!
Font Màgica
Pl. de Carles Buïgas • Mid-Feb to March Fri & Sat 7pm, 7.30pm & 8pm; April, May & Oct Fri & Sat 9pm, 9.30pm & 10pm; June–Sept Thurs–Sun 9.30pm, 10pm & 10.30pm • Free • bcn.es/fontmagica
The Font Màgica stands at the foot of the Montjuïc steps as you walk up from the landmark Pl. d’Espanya. On selected evenings, the “Magic Fountain” forms the centrepiece of an impressive, if slightly kitsch, sound-and-light show, with sprays and sheets of brightly coloured water dancing to the strains of Holst and Abba.

!
CaixaForum
Av. de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 6–8 • Daily 10am–8pm; July & Aug Wed open until 11pm • Free, fees for some exhibitions • 934 768 600, www.caixaforum.com • Espanya
A terrific arts and cultural centre, the Caixa Forum is set within the former Casamarona textile factory, built in 1911. On the main floor, a permanent exhibition covers the building itself, while the next level up offers access to several distinct pavilion-like gallery spaces. Each usually holds a separate temporary exhibition, on themes ranging from film or fashion to medieval history. The Fundació La Caixa has sufficient clout to borrow artefacts from big-name outfits like the British Museum or the Musée d’Orsay, so you can expect a very high standard. Riding the elevators one level higher brings you to the undulating brick-paved roof, which offers views up to Montjuïc. There’s no access however to its tall, emblematic Casaramona tower, etched in blue and yellow tiling.

???
Poble Espanyol
Av. de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 13 • Mon 9am–8pm, Tues–Thurs & Sun 9am–midnight, Fri 9am–3am, Sat 9am–4am, workshops daily 10am–6/8pm, depending on season • €14, ages 4–12 €7, under-4s free, family ticket €42, night ticket €7, combined ticket with MNAC €26; all prices discounted online • 935 086 300, poble-espanyol.com • Espanya and 800m walk, or bus #150 or #13 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina
An inspired concept for 1929’s International Exhibition, the Poble Espanyol, or Spanish Village, is a homogenous self-contained enclave, built in old stone, where various streets and squares hold reconstructions of famous or characteristic buildings from all over Spain. Each little district is dedicated to a specific region, starting with the fairy-tale medieval walls of Ávila through which you enter. “Get to know Spain in one hour” is the promise; it’s all hugely enjoyable, and nothing like as cheesy as you might imagine. You could easily believe, in fact, that it had been here for hundreds of years, an impression helped, of course, by the fact that it’s now almost a century old.

!!!
Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC)
Palau Nacional • May–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm; Oct–April Tues–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm; open Mon when it’s a public holiday 10am–3pm • €12, ticket valid for two days within a month, annual pass €18, under-16s & over-65s free; free for everyone Sat 3–8pm & first Sun of the month; charges vary for special exhibitions • 936 220 360, mnac.cat • Espanya/Poble Sec, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina, or bus #55 from C/-de Lleida
The towering, domed Palau Nacional, set proud on Montjuïc at the top of the long climb up from the Font Màgica, was the flagship building of Barcelona’s 1929 International Exhibition. It’s now home to one of Spain’s greatest museums, the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC), which showcases a thousand years of Catalan art in stupendous surroundings.
In such a wide-ranging museum it can be hard to know where to start. If your time is limited, be sure not to miss the medieval collection, which is split into two main sections, one dedicated to Romanesque art, the other to Gothic. MNAC also has impressive holdings of European Renaissance and Baroque art, as well as an unsurpassed collection of nineteenth- and twentieth-century Catalan art. In addition, there’s a changing roster of blockbuster exhibitions.
TEATRE GREC AND THE BARCELONA FESTIVAL
Montjuïc takes centre-stage during Barcelona’s annual summer cultural festival (barcelonafestival.com), known as the Grec, when arias soar from the open-air stage of the Teatre Grec, a Greek theatre cut into a former quarry on the Poble Sec side of the hill. Running from late June until the end of August, the festival incorporates drama, music and dance, with the opening sessions and many atmospheric events staged in the theatre, from Shakespearean productions to shows by avant-garde performance artists. These can be magical nights – a true Barcelona experience – though you’ll need to be quick off the mark for tickets, which usually go on sale in May.
Romanesque collection
From the eleventh century, great numbers of sturdy Romanesque churches were built in the high Catalan Pyrenees, decorated with extraordinary biblical frescoes. By the nineteenth century, however, many of them lay abandoned. Today, the frescoes are magnificently presented at MNAC, in nest-like reconstructions of the original church interiors. The highlight of the whole astonishing collection comes in room 7, where the extraordinary Christ in Majesty, painted by the so-called Master of Taüll for the twelfth- century church of Sant Climent in Taüll, combines a Byzantine hierarchical composition with the imposing colours and strong outlines of contemporary manuscript illuminators.
Gothic collection
The evolution from the Romanesque to the Gothic period was marked by a move from murals to painting on wood, and by the depiction of more naturalistic figures in scenes of the lives of saints and royalty. By the time of fifteenth-century Catalan artists like Jaume Huguet and Lluís Dalmau, works showed the strong influence of contemporary Flemish painting, in the use of denser colours, the depiction of crowd scenes and a concern for perspective. The last Catalan-Gothic-era artist of note is the so-called Master of La Seu d’Urgell, who is responsible for a fine series of six paintings that once formed the covers of an organ.
Renaissance and Baroque collections
Major European artists displayed include Rubens, Goya, El Greco, Zurbarán and Velázquez, though the museum is of course keen to play up Catalan works of the period, which largely absorbed the prevailing European influences – thus Barcelona artist Antoni Viladomat (1678–1755), whose twenty paintings of St Francis, executed for a monastery, are shown here in their entirety. However, more familiar to most will be the masterpieces of the Spanish Golden Age, notably Velázquez’s Saint Paul.
Modern art collection
MNAC ends on a high note with its modern Catalan art collection, which is particularly good on modernista and noucentista painting and sculpture, the two dominant schools of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Rooms highlight individual artists and genres, shedding light on the development of art in an exciting period of Catalunya’s history, while there are fascinating diversions into modernista interior design (with furniture by Gaudí), avant-garde sculpture and historical photography.

?
THE OLYMPICS ON MONTJUÏC
The main road through Montjuïc climbs around the hill and up to the city’s principal Olympic area, centred on the Estadi Olímpic. Built originally for the 1929 exhibition, the stadium was completely refitted to accommodate the 1992 opening and closing ceremonies, while a vast terrace to one side provides one of the finest vantage points in the city. Long water-fed troughs break the concrete and marble expanse, and the confident, space-age curve of Santiago Calatrava’s communications tower dominates the skyline. Around the other side, just across the road from the stadium, the history of the Games themselves is covered in the Museu Olímpic i de l’Esport (Av. de l’Estadi 60; April–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm; Oct–March Tues–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm; €5.80; 932 925 379, museuolimpicbcn.coma).
The 1992 Olympics were the second planned for Montjuïc’s stadium. The first, in 1936 – the so-called “People’s Olympics” – were organized as an alternative to the Nazis’ infamous Berlin Games of that year, but the day before the official opening Franco’s army revolt triggered the Civil War and scuppered the Barcelona Games. Some of the 25,000 athletes and spectators who had turned up stayed on to join the Republican forces.

!!!
Fundació Joan Miró
Parc de Montjuïc • April–Oct Tues, Wed, Fri & Sat 10am–8pm, Thurs 10am–9pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm; Nov–March Tues, Wed, Fri & Sat 10am–6pm, Thurs 10am–9pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm; only open on Mon when it’s a public holiday, in which case 10am–3pm • General admission to all areas €12, otherwise exhibitions €7 • 934 439 470, fmirobcn.org • Paral.lel, then Funicular de Montjuïc and 5min walk, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina, or #55 from C/-Llieda
Montjuïc’s highlight for many is the Fundació Joan Miró, Barcelona’s most adventurous art museum, opened in 1975 and set among gardens overlooking the city. Joan Miró (1893–1983) was one of the greatest Catalan artists, establishing an international reputation while never severing his links with his homeland. He showed a childlike delight in colours and shapes and developed a free, highly decorative style – the paintings and drawings, in particular, are instantly recognizable, and are among the chief links between Surrealism and abstract art. Miró had his first exhibition in 1918, and after that spent his summers in Catalunya (and the rest of the time in France) before moving to Mallorca in 1956, where he died.
Inside the museum
Miró’s architect friend Josep Lluís Sert designed the beautiful museum building. Largely donated by Miró himself, its huge collection of paintings, graphics, tapestries and sculptures ranges from 1914 up to 1978. Most of the paintings are drawn from Miró’s later years, as he only started to set works aside for the museum in the 1960s. However, they do include early Realist works dating from before he decided to “assassinate art” and abandon figurative painting in the mid-1920s, like the effervescent Portrait of a Young Girl (1919).
Other gaps are filled by donations from Miró’s widow, Pilar Juncosa, which demonstrate Miró’s preoccupations during the 1930s and 1940s. This was the period when he started his Constellations series, introducing the colours, themes and symbols that, eventually pared down to the minimalist basics, came to define his work: reds and blues; women, birds and tears; the sun, moon and stars.
Elsewhere you’ll find several of Miró’s enormous, dense and very shaggy tapestries, and his pencil drawings, particularly of misshapen women and gawky ballerinas. His sculptures are displayed outdoors, both in the gardens and on the spacious roof terrace. There’s also a contemporary art library, a bookshop and a pleasant open-air café that’s accessible whether or not you pay to get into the museum itself.

?
Castell de Montjuïc
Carretera de Montjuïc 66 • Castle Daily: April–Oct 10am–8pm, Nov–March 10am–6pm • €5, under-16s free, Sun free for everyone after 3pm • Grounds Daily: April–Oct 9am–9pm, Nov–March 9am–7pm • Free • 932 564 440, bcn.cat/castelldemontjuic • Direct access by Telefèric de Montjuïc, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina
The best way to reach the castle at the very top of Montjuïc is via the Telefèric de Montjuïc, which tacks up the hillside before depositing you just outside the forbidding red-brick walls of the eighteenth-century fortress. It’s worth coming up here simply to admire the dramatic location, and to enjoy the views from the grounds, which are free to enter.
Paying admission to the castle buys you marginally better views, especially from its broad ramparts, but more importantly gives access to fascinating displays on its history. Finally handed over to the city in 2008, the fortress had long been a symbol of Barcelona’s occupation by a foreign power – the Spanish state. After all, it had served for decades as a military base and prison, with its mighty cannon trained on the city below, and it was here that the last president of the prewar Generalitat, Lluís Companys i Jover, was executed on Franco’s orders on October 15, 1940.
Below the castle walls, a panoramic pathway cut from the cliff edge, the Camí del Mar, provides scintillating views. The path is just over 1km long and ends at the back of the castle battlements near the Mirador del Migdia.

?
Jardí Botànic de Barcelona
C/Dr Font i Quer 2 • Daily: April–Sept 10am–7pm; Oct–March 10am–5pm • €3.50, or €7 combined ticket with Museu Blau, under-16s free, free for everyone Sun after 3pm & all day first Sun of the month • 932 564 160, museuciencies.bcn.cat • Espanya, then 20min walk via escalators, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina or #55 from C/-Lleida
Principal among Montjuïc’s many gardens is the Jardí Botànic de Barcelona, which is laid out on terraced slopes that offer fine views across the city. It’s a beautifully kept contemporary garden, where wide, easy-to-follow paths wind through landscaped zones representing the flora of the Mediterranean, Canary Islands, California, Chile, North and South Africa and Australia.
< Back to Barcelona






Parc de la Ciutadella
Park entrances on Pg. de Picasso (Barceloneta, or a short walk from La Ribera) and Pg. de Pujades (Arc de Triomf) • Daily 10am–dusk • Park entrance free
The Parc de la Ciutadella, east of La Ribera, is the largest green space in the city centre. It’s also the meeting place of the Catalan parliament (no public access), occupying part of a fortress-like structure that’s the only surviving portion of the star-shaped Bourbon citadel that gave the park its name. After la Ciutadella was chosen to host the Universal Exhibition in 1888, modernista architects left their mark in eye-catching buildings and monuments, not least the giant brick Arc de Triomf at the park’s inland end.
Cascada

!!!
Parc de la Ciutadella • Arc de Triomf
The first major project undertaken inside the park was the Cascada, in its northeast corner. The young Antoni Gaudí, then a student, assisted the principal architect, and the Baroque extravagance of this monumental fountain hints at the flamboyant decoration that later became his trademark. He’s also thought to have had a hand in designing the iron park gates.

???
THE CROSS-HARBOUR CABLE CAR aka Teleferico del Puerto
Barcelona’s most thrilling ride has to be the Transbordador Aeri cable car, which sweeps across the inner harbour between the top of the Torre de Sant Sebastiá, near the tip of Barceloneta, and the hill of Montjuïc (every 15min; daily: March, April & mid-Sept to Oct 10.30am–7pm; June to mid-Sept 10.30am–8pm; Nov–Feb 11am–5.30pm; €11 one-way, €16.50 return; 934 304 716, telefericodebarcelona.com). As you dangle high above the water, you can enjoy superb views over the city. There’s an additional stop in the middle, at the hundred-metre-tall Torre de Jaume I in Port Vell. As the cable car only carries nineteen passengers at a time, expect queues – and potential disappointment – in summer and at weekends, while strong winds will close the ride altogether.

?
Castell dels Tres Dragons and Museu Martorell
Pg. de Picasso • Arc de Triomf
The whimsical red-brick Castell dels Tres Dragons (Three Dragons Castle) at the park’s northwest corner was designed by Lluís Domènech i Montaner. Home for many years to the local zoology museum, it’s not currently in use. Along with the similarly defunct Neoclassical Museu Martorell, which long housed the city’s geological collections, it’s slated for restoration.

---
Umbracle and Hivernacle
Pg. de Picasso • Under renovation at time of writing • Arc de Triomf
The twin unsung glories of Ciutadella are its plant houses: the handsome Umbracle (palm house), with a barrelled wood-slat roof supported by cast-iron pillars, and the larger Hivernacle (conservatory), the enclosed greenhouses of which are separated by a soaring glass-roofed terrace. Though both are closed to visitors and looking somewhat dilapidated, the plants within still cling to life.
< Back to Barcelona





Barceloneta
An eighteenth-century neighbourhood of tightly packed streets, Barceloneta squeezes between the harbour on one side and the beach on the other. It was laid out on bare mudflats in 1755, primarily to rehouse inhabitants of the Ribera district, whose homes had been destroyed to make way for the Ciutadella fortress. Its long, narrow streets, punctuated by small squares, are lined with small, tall and abundantly windowed houses, designed to give the sailors and fishing folk who lived here plenty of sun and fresh air.
Though this remains very much a workaday community, some original houses feature decorative flourishes, while an eighteenth-century fountain and the Neoclassical church of Sant Miquel del Port survives in Plaça de la Barceloneta. A block over, in Pl. de la Font, the beautifully refurbished local food market, Mercat de la Barceloneta (Mon–Thurs & Sat 7am–3pm, Fri 7am–8pm), boasts excellent bars and restaurants.
Barceloneta is famous for its seafood restaurants. They’re especially concentrated along the harbourside Passeig Joan de Borbó, where for most of the year you can eat at an outdoor table, though if you’d rather escape the traffic the restaurants along the nearby marina are preferable.

? and !!!
Platja de Sant Sebastià and Passeig Marítim
Barceloneta
Barceloneta’s beach, Platja de Sant Sebastià, is the first in the series of sandy city beaches that stretches northeast from here along the coast. It curves out to the landmark, sail-shaped W Barcelona hotel, which was designed by Catalan architect Ricardo Bofill. Meanwhile, at the Barceloneta end there are beach bars, outdoor cafés and public sculptures, while a double row of palms backs the Passeig Marítim esplanade that runs above the sands as far as the Port Olímpic (a 15min walk). Sunbathers sprawl on the sands, swimmers venture into the water, and there’s a surfing break immediately offshore. The foreshore is busy with strolling pedestrians, and itinerant vendors patrol the strands offering snacks and drinks.
< Back to Barcelona


?
Port Olímpic
Ciutadella/Vila Olímpica
As you approach Port Olímpic along the Passeig Marítim, a shimmering golden mirage slowly resolves itself into a huge copper fish, courtesy of Frank Gehry, architect of Bilbao’s Guggenheim. The emblem of the huge seafront development constructed for the 1992 Olympics, it’s backed by the city’s two tallest buildings, the Torre Mapfre and the steel-framed Hotel Arts Barcelona, both 154m high.
The bulk of the action is contained within two wharves: the Moll de Mestral has a lower deck lined with cafés, bars and terrassas, while the Moll de Gregal sports a double-decker tier of seafood restaurants. The whole zone turns into a full-on resort in summer, which has much the same feel as any of the exclusive enclaves that pepper the entire shoreline of the western Mediterranean.
Northeast along the coast from Port Olímpic, the city beaches are split into separate named sections (Nova Icària, Bogatell, Mar Bella, Nova Mar Bella and Llevant), each with showers, playgrounds and open-air café-bars. It’s a pretty extraordinary leisure facility to find so close to a city centre – the sands are regularly swept and replenished, while joggers, cyclists and bladers have one of the Med’s best views for company.
< Back to Barcelona






Diagonal Mar
El Maresme Fòrum, or tram #T4 to Fòrum via Glòries and Avgda. Diagonal
The waterfront convention and business district of Diagonal Mar, 4km along the coast northeast of Port Olímpic, was developed in the wake of the Universal Forum of Cultures Expo, held here in 2004. Everything is on a grand scale, starting with Jacques Herzog’s dazzling Museu Blau, which hovers – seemingly unsupported – above the ground. Beyond that stretches the vast Parc del Fòrum, a showpiece urban leisure project.

---
Museu Blau
Pl. Leonardo da Vinci 4–5, Parc del Fòrum • March–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–8pm, Oct–Feb Tues–Fri 10am–6pm, Sat 10am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–8pm • €6, ages 16–29 €2.70, under-16s free; free for all first Sun of the month & every Sun after 3pm • 932 566 002, museuciencies.bcn.cat • El Maresme Fòrum, or tram T4 to Fòrum
To unravel the mysteries of life, the universe and everything, you need travel no further than the Natural Science Museum’s bold reboot of its heritage collections in the visually stunning Museu Blau (Blue Museum). The permanent Planeta Vida (Planet Life) exhibition here plots a journey through nothing less than the history of life on earth. Starting with the Big Bang, it draws on a million-strong array of rocks, fossils, plants and animals, ranging from the smallest microbe to a giant whale skeleton. It’s heavily focused on evolutionary, whole-earth, Gaia principles, with plenty of entertaining, interactive bells and whistles to guide you through topics as diverse as sex and reproduction and environmental conservation.

Parc del Fòrum
El Maresme Fòrum, or tram T4 to Fòrum via Glòries and Avgda. Diagonal
Diagonal Mar’s main open space, the Parc del Fòrum, is an immense, undulating expanse that spreads towards the sea, culminating in a giant solar-panelled canopy that overlooks the marina, beach and park areas. The space can seem a bit soulless at times, but bars, dancefloors, open-air cinema and chill-out zones are set up in summer, while the authorities have shifted some large music festivals and events down here in order to inject a bit of life into the place outside convention time.
< Back to Barcelona






Gràcia
A short walk southwest, Pl. del Sol is the beating heart of much of the district’s nightlife, while Plaça Vila de Gràcia, the “clock-tower square”, a couple of minutes south, is another popular place to meet for brunch. However, the one unmissable attraction is just on the neighbourhood fringe, namely Antoni Gaudí’s breathtaking Park Güell.

?
Park Güell
Set on the hillside above Gràcia, Antoni Gaudí’s extraordinary Park Güell was, apart from the Sagrada Família, his most ambitious project. It was originally planned as a private housing estate, but only two of the proposed sixty houses were actually built, and the park was opened to the public instead in 1922. It’s now one of Barcelona’s most popular tourist attractions, and admission to the Zona Monumental that holds its most iconic sites is by timed ticket only. Access to the rest of the park, where the wooded, landscaped gardens make a nice spot for a picnic, remains free, but it’s unlikely to hold your interest for long.
Zona Monumental
Daily: April, Sept & Oct 8am–8.30pm; May–Aug 8am–9.30pm; Nov–March 8.30am–6.30pm, last entry 1hr before closing • €7 online, €8 on site, under-7s free; guided tours €7 extra • 934 091 831, parkguell.cat
Sealed off as the Zona Monumental and looking down across the city to the Mediterranean, the core of Park Güell is a hallucinatory swirl of ideas and excesses. Up to 400 visitors are allowed in every half-hour, and each ticket is only valid for a specific half-hour time slot (once inside, you can stay as long as you like). Reserve online as far ahead as possible, though tickets are also sold when available – unlikely in high summer – at ticket offices or ATMs in the park itself. Directly ahead of the main entrance, on C/d’Olot, a monumental stairway climbs past a giant mosaic salamander known as el drac (the dragon) to reach the vast Hall of Columns, where 84 Doric columns soar at disconcertingly irregular angles to enclose a space Gaudí intended to be the estate’s market. A long meandering ceramic bench snakes along the edge of the terrace that forms the roof of the Hall of Columns. Entirely covered with a brightly coloured, broken tile-and-glass mosaic (a technique known as trencadís), it forms a dizzying sequence of abstract motifs, symbols, words and pictures.
Casa Museu Gaudí
Park Güell, outside Zona Monumental • Daily: April–Sept 9am–8pm; Oct–March 10am–6pm • €5.50, combined ticket with Sagrada Família audioguide tour €24 • 932 193 811, casamuseugaudi.org
One of Gaudí’s collaborators, Francesc Berenguer, designed a turreted house for the architect, now known as the Casa Museu Gaudí, which stands immediately east of the Zona Monumental. Gaudí lived here from 1906 until 1925, when he de-camped to the Sagrada Família. The downstairs rooms celebrate Gaudí’s work as a designer, while upstairs his ascetic study and bedroom have been kept much as he knew them.
arrival and departure: Gràcia and ParK Güell
By metro and train For Gràcia, the best metro stations are Diagonal (south), Fontana (north) or Joanic (east); each is around 500m walk from Gràcia’s central squares. If you’re heading straight for Park Güell use Vallcarca; walk a few hundred metres down Avgda. de Vallcarca until you see the escalators on your left, which climb to the western park entrance (15min).
By bus Bus #24 from Pl. de Catalunya or Pg. de Gràcia stops on Carretera del Carmel at the eastern gate of Park Güell. The Bus Turístic stops at the bottom end of C/Larrard.
< Back to Barcelona



Les Corts and Pedralbes
West of Barcelona city centre, what was once the village of Les Corts is now seamlessly integrated into the modern city, and noteworthy primarily for holding the hallowed precincts of Camp Nou, FC Barcelona’s stupendous football stadium. Nearby, across Avinguda Diagonal, the Palau Reial de Pedralbes is home to serene public gardens, while a half-day’s excursion can be made by walking up past the Gaudí dragon gate at Pavellons Güell to the calm cloisters of the Gothic monastery of Pedralbes.

!!!
Camp Nou and FC Barcelona
Football in Barcelona being a genuine obsession, support for the local giants FC (Futbol Club) Barcelona has been raised to an art form. Més que un club (“More than just a club”) is the proud boast, and certainly during the dictatorship years the club stood as a symbol around which Catalans could rally. Arch-rivals Real Madrid, on the other hand, were always seen as Franco’s club. In recent years, culminating in Barcelona’s fifth coronation as European champions in 2015, the swashbuckling players in the blaugrana (claret and blue) shirts have won hearts worldwide with their elegant tiki-taka, pass-and-move style, to become every football fan’s second favourite team.
Museum and stadium tour
Entrance on Avgda. Aristides Maillol • Mid-Oct to March Mon–Sat 10am–6.30pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm; April to mid-Oct daily 9.30am–7.30pm; last tour 1hr before closing; on match days, and also on the day before Champions League matches, the museum is open but there are no tours • €25, under-14s €20, under-6s free; audioguide €5 • fcbarcelona.com • Palau Reial
Together, the 98,000-seat stadium and museum – billed as the “Camp Nou Experience” – provide a magnificent celebration of Spain’s national sport. This, Europe’s largest stadium, was built in 1957, enlarged for the 1982 World Cup semi-final to accommodate 98,000 people, and is about to undergo a face-lift, scheduled for completion in 2021, that will increase its capacity to around 105,000.
Tracing the history of the club from its foundation in 1899, the museum shifts from black-and-white photos and battered old boots and balls to a relentless succession of silverware, including the six cups won in 2009 alone. Beyond that, the self-guided tour winds through the visitors’ changing rooms and players’ tunnel out onto the pitch, and then leads up to the press gallery and directors’ box for stunning views. While it’s a poor substitute for attending an actual game, it does give the chance take a selfie alongside a life-size photo of Lionel Messi.

---
Palau de Pedralbes
Av. Diagonal 686 • Gardens daily 10am–dusk • Free • Palau Reial or tram #T1, #T2 or #T3
Set in formal grounds opposite the university on Avinguda Diagonal, the Italianate Palau de Pedralbes is closed to the public, but its gardens – a breezy oasis of Himalayan cedars, strawberry trees and bougainvillea – are a lovely way to spend an afternoon. Hidden in a bamboo thicket is an early work by Antoni Gaudí, the Hercules fountain (1884). In June and July each year, a music festival (festivalpedralbes.com) takes place in the gardens.
Pavellons Güell
Av. de Pedralbes 7 • Daily 10am–4pm, last entry 3.30pm; English tours, no extra charge, 10.15am, 11.15am & 3pm • €5, under-18s €2.50 • 933 177 652, rutadelmodernisme.com • Palau Reial
As an early test of his capabilities, Antoni Gaudí was asked by his patron, Eusebi Güell, to rework the entrance, gatehouse and stables of the Güell summer residence, which was sited on a large working estate well away from the filth and the unruly mobs of downtown Barcelona. The brick-and-tile stables and outbuildings – known as the Pavellons Güell – survive as Gaudí created them, though it’s the gate that’s the most famous element. An extraordinary winged dragon made of twisted iron snarls at the passers-by, its razor-toothed jaws spread wide in a fearsome roar.

!!!
Monestir de Pedralbes
Bxda. del Monestir 9 • April–Sept Tues–Fri 10am–5pm, Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–8pm; Oct–March Tues–Fri 10am–2pm, Sat & Sun 10am–5pm, hols 10am–2pm • €5, under-16s free, free Sun after 3pm, and all of first Sun of each month • 932 563 434, monestirpedralbes.bcn.cat • Palau Reial and 20min walk, or FGC Reina Elisenda (frequent trains from Pl. de Catalunya) and 10min walk, or bus #64 from Pl. Universitat
Founded in 1326 for the nuns of the Order of St Clare, the Gothic Monestir de Pedralbes is, in effect, an entire monastic village preserved on the outskirts of the city, within medieval walls that completely shut out the clamour of the twenty-first century. After 600 years of isolation, the monastery was sequestered by the Generalitat during the Civil War; when it opened as a museum in 1983, a new convent was built alongside as part of the deal.
The triple tiers of the magnificent cloisters are supported by the slenderest of columns, with the only sound the tinkling water from the fountain. Side rooms and chambers give a clear impression of medieval convent life, from the chapterhouse and austere refectory to a fully equipped kitchen and infirmary. Treasures acquired by the monastery over the centuries include Gothic furniture, paintings by Flemish artists, and some outstanding illuminated choir books. In the adjacent church the foundation’s sponsor, Elisenda de Montcada, wife of Jaume II, lies in an ornate marble tomb.
< Back to Barcelona





Tibidabo and Parc de Collserola
The views from the heights of Tibidabo (550m), the peak that signals the northwestern boundary of Barcelona, are legendary. On a clear day you can see across to the Pyrenees and even as far out to sea as Mallorca. However, while many visitors make the tram and funicular ride up to Tibidabo’s wonderfully old-fashioned amusement park, few realize that the Parc de Collserola stretches beyond, peppered with peaks, wooded river valleys and hiking paths. Meanwhile, families en route to or from Tibidabo won’t want to miss the CosmoCaixa science museum.

!!!
CosmoCaixa
C/Isaac Newton 26 • Tues–Sun 10am–8pm; also open Mon 10am–8pm during summer hols • €4; under-16s free, but children’s activities €4, planetarium €4 • 932 126 050, obrasocial.lacaixa.es • FGC Avgda. del Tibidabo (trains from Pl. de Catalunya) and 10min walk, or Tramvia Blau or Bus Turístic stop close by
For anyone travelling with children in tow, Barcelona’s enormous, up-to-the-minute science museum, CosmoCaixa, is a must-see attraction. Hands-on experiments and displays investigate everything “from bacteria to Shakespeare”, with the two big draws being the 100 tonnes of “sliced” rock in the Mur Geològic (Geological Wall) and, best of all, the Bosc Inundat – nothing less than a thousand square metres of real Amazonian rainforest, complete with croc-filled mangroves, anacondas and giant catfish.

!!!
Parc d’Atraccions Tibidabo
Pl. del Tibidabo • Days and hours vary, but basically March–May & Oct–Dec Sat, Sun & hols only; June–Sept & hols Wed–Sun: park open noon–7/11pm depending on season; closed Jan & Feb • Skywalk ticket €12.70, full admission €28.50; €7.80/€10.30 for those under 1.2m tall • 932 117 942, tibidabo.es
Barcelona’s self-styled “magic mountain” amusement park – the Parc d’Atraccions – has been thrilling the citizens for over a century. It’s a mix of traditional rides, plus an influx of high-tech roller coasters and free-fall drops, laid out around several levels of the mountaintop and connected by landscaped paths and gardens. Some famous historic attractions are grouped under the discounted “Skywalk” ticket, like the aeroplane – spinning since 1928 – the carousel, and the quirky Museu d’Autòmates, a fully functional collection of coin-operated antique fairground machines. Summer weekends finish with parades, concerts and a noisy correfoc fireworks display.
Arrival and Departure: Tibidabo
By train, tram and funicular Take the FGC train (Tibidabo line #7) from Pl. de Catalunya to Avgda. Tibidabo (the last stop), then cross the road to the tram/bus shelter. An antique tram, the Tramvia Blau (every 15–30min: mid-June to mid-Sept daily 10am–7.30pm; Nov–March Sat, Sun & hols 10am–6pm; April to mid-June & mid-Sept to Nov Sat, Sun & hols 10am–7.30pm; €5.50 single), then runs you uphill to Pl. del Doctor Andreu; there’s a bus service instead out of season during the week. By the tram and bus stop on Pl. del Doctor Andreu, you change to the Funicular del Tibidabo, with connections to Tibidabo at the top (every 15min; operates when the Parc d’Attracions is open; €4.10 with park admission, €7.70 without).
By bus The Bus Turístic stops at Avgda. del Tibidabo, to connect with the Tramvia Blau. Alternatively, the special Tibibus (T2A) runs direct to Tibidabo from Pl. de Catalunya (from 10.15am daily when the park is open; €3, fare reimbursed with park admission). Local bus #111 runs on a circuit (every 30min; city passes and transport tickets valid) between Tibidabo park and Vallvidrera village.

!?
Parc de Collserola
Centre d’Informació daily 9.30am–3pm • 932 803 552, parcnaturalcollserola.cat • FGC Bxda. de Vallvidrera (on the Sabadell or Terrassa line from Pl. de Catalunya; 15min)
Given a half-decent day, local bikers, hikers and outdoors enthusiasts all make a beeline for the city’s ring of wooded hills beyond Tibidabo, the Parc de Collserola. The park information centre lies in oak and pine woods, an easy, signposted ten-minute walk up through the trees from the train station. There’s a bar-restaurant here with an outdoor terrace, plus an exhibition on the park’s history, flora and fauna, while the staff hand out English-language leaflets detailing walks that range from a fifteen-minute stroll to the Vallvidrera dam to a couple of hours circling the hills.
< Back to Barcelona






Arrival and Departure: Barcelona


Barcelona Airport

	!!!
	Airport train 
		R2 Nord train route departs from Terminal T2 (with free shuttle bus to the station from T1 - shuttle ride takes around ten minutes)			
			every 30min to Barcelona Sants (main train station) and to Passeig de Gràcia (best stop for Eixample, Plaça de Catalunya and the Ramblas)
			journey time 20min
			€4.10
				Zone 1 city travel passes (targetes), the T-10 ticket, and the Barcelona Card are valid on the airport train service
			airport train station is about a five-minute walk from Terminal 2
				
	!!!
	Aerobus
		from both T1 and T2 stops in the city at Plaça d’Espanya, Gran Via–Urgell, Plaça Universitat and Plaça de Catalunya
			every 5–10min
			takes 35–40min to reach Pl. Catalunya
			€5.90 one-way, €10.20 return
				buy tickets on the bus or from agents at the bus stop
			aerobusbcn.com
		separate buses run to either Terminal T1 or T2
		services to the airport from Plaça de Catalunya leave from in front of El Corte Inglés department store		
		
	?
	Local bus
		City bus #46
			from both T1 and T2 to Pl. d’Espanya
			one-way fare of just €2.15
			catch a connecting bus or metro onwards from there		
			
	???
	Metro
		L9 Sud line, which only runs as far as Zona Universitària, rather than the city centre
			change onto the L1 line at Torrassa to get to the Catalunya station
		single ticket from the airport to any other metro station costs €4.50
			T-10 ticket is not valid
		

			

City transport

	metro, FGC trains, rodalies/cercanías (Renfe-run local trains) and buses come under a combined system

	transit plan divides the province into six zones
		entire metropolitan area of Barcelona (except the airport) falls within Zone 1, that’s the only zone you’ll need to worry about on a day-to-day basis
	

	tickets
		you can buy a single ticket every time you ride (€2.20)

		targeta
			discount ticket strip that you pass through the metro or train barrier, or slot in the machine on the bus, tram or funicular
			
			sold at metro, train, tram and funicular stations, but not on the buses
			
			T-10 (“tay day-oo” in Catalan) costs €10.20, and is valid for ten separate journeys, other than to or from the airport on metro line L9 Sud, with changes between methods of transport allowed within 75 minutes			
				can be used by more than one person at a time – just feed it through the barrier for each person travelling (just make sure you punch it the same number of times as there are people travelling)
				
			Two-/three-day tickets €15/22 – unlimited travel on all transport except the Aerobús
				
	funicular
		Montjuïc park
		Tibidabo funfair
		suburban village of Vallvidrera

		Teleférico del Puerto
			one way/return €11/16.50			
			from Barceloneta right across the harbour to Montjuïc

		Telefèric de Montjuïc
			return €12.50						
			from the top station of the Montjuïc funicular all the way up to the castle

							
							

Sightseeing Discount Cards

	Barcelona Card
		barcelonaturisme.com
		
		3 days €45
			ten percent discount if you buy online
		
		free public transport
		free admission to most major museums
			CaixaForum
			Fundació Joan Miró
			Monestir de Pedralbes

			MUHBA
			Museu Picasso with advance reservation only

			--review
			Etnòlogic
			Nacional d’Art de Catalunya
			Olimpici de l’Esport
			CosmoCaixa		
		
		discounts at other museums as well as shops and restaurants
		
		two-day version, the €20 Barcelona Card Express, covers transport but no free museum admissions, only discounts
		





Eating
You’ll probably do most of your eating where you do most of your sightseeing

RAMBLAS
CAFÉS
???
Cafè de l’Òpera Ramblas 74 933 177 585, cafeoperabcn.com; Liceu; map. If you’re going to pay through the nose for a Ramblas seat, it may as well be at this famous old café-bar opposite the opera house (drinks and snacks from around €2), with its sought-after pavement tables. Daily 8.30am–2.30am.

???
Café Zurich Pl. Catalunya 1 933 179 153; Catalunya; map. This is the most famous meet-and-greet café in town right at the top of the Ramblas underneath El Triangle shopping centre. Sit inside if you don’t want to be bothered by endless rounds of buskers and beggars. Mon–Fri 8am–11pm, Sat 9am–midnight, Sun 9am–11pm.

!!!
Escribà Ramblas 83 933 016 027, escriba.es; Liceu; map. Many rate this classy pastry shop in the historic modernista Antiga Casa Figueras building near the Boqueria market as the best bakery in Barcelona. The gorgeous individual-size cakes start at €4.50. Daily 9am–10pm.

TAPAS BARS
!!!
Bar Pinotxo Mercat de la Boqueria, Ramblas 91 933 171 731; pinotxobar.com; Liceu; map. The market’s most renowned refuelling stop – just inside the main entrance on the right. Let the cheery staff steer you towards the tapas and daily specials (€5–15), anything from a slice of tortilla to fried baby squid. Daily 6.30am–4pm; closed Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d1074885-Reviews-Bar_Pinotxo-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

RESTAURANTS
???
Opera Samfaina Ramblas 51 934 817 971, operasamfaina.com; Liceu; map. A surrealist (and kitschy) fantasy landscape sets the stage for a one-of-a-kind tapas-and-movie experience (Odyssey, €33). Alternatively, hit the multiple bars beyond the viewing room that serve local wines and tapas created by star chefs (€2–12). Wed–Mon noon–1am.

BARRI GÒTIC
CAFÉS
???
Bar del Pi Pl. Sant Josep Oriol 1 933 022 123; bardelpi.com; Liceu; map. Best known for its terrace tables on one of Barcelona’s prettiest squares. Linger over drinks, tapas (€1.50–10) and sandwiches (€4–6) as the old town reveals its charms, especially during the weekend artists’ market. Tues–Fri 9am–11pm, Sat 10am–11pm, Sun 10am–10pm.

???
Granja Dulcinea C/Petritxol 2 933 026 824, granjadulcinea.com; Liceu; map. One of the old town’s age-old treats is to come here for a thick hot chocolate, slathered in cream (€3.50). It’s a bygone-era kind of place, with dickie-bow-wearing waiters patrolling the beamed and panelled room. Daily 9am–1pm & 5–9pm; closed Aug.

TAPAS BARS
!!!
Bodega La Plata C/Mercè 28 933 151 009, barlaplata.com; Drassanes; map. A classic taste of the old town, with a marble counter open to the street and dirt-cheap wine served straight from the barrel. For €2.50 you can get a dish of the speciality anchovies, either marinated or deep-fried like whitebait. Mon–Sat 9am–3pm & 6.30–11pm.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d1191525-Reviews-Bar_La_Plata-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

RESTAURANTS
!!!
Café de l’Acadèmia C/Lledó 1 933 198 253; Jaume I; map. Great for a date or a lazy lunch, with creative Catalan cooking served in a romantic stone-flagged restaurant or outside in the medieval square. Prices are pretty reasonable (mains €12–20) and it’s always busy, so dinner reservations essential. Mon–Fri 1.30–4pm & 8.30–11.30pm; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d697441-Reviews-Cafe_De_L_Academia-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

EL RAVAL AND MONTJUÏC
CAFÉS
???
Federal C/Parlament 39 931 873 607, federalcafe.es; Poble Sec; map. Effortlessly cool café, squished into a corner townhouse with a great little roof-garden on top. The Australian owners have imported their own funky vibe, so whether you’re looking for toast with Vegemite, a glass of New Zealand Sav blanc or a dandelion soy latte, you can guarantee that there’s nowhere else quite like this in Barcelona (apart, perhaps, from their second branch at Ptge. de la Pau 11 in the Barri Gòtic). Mon–Thurs 8am–11pm, Fri 8am–1am, Sat 9am–1am, Sun 9am–5.30pm.

???
Granja M. Viader C/Xuclà 4–6 933 183 486, granjaviader.cat; Liceu; map. The oldest traditional granja (milk bar) in town has a pavement plaque outside for services to the city. The signature drink is their own invention, “Cacaolat” (a popular chocolate drink), or try mel i mató (curd cheese and honey) or llet Mallorquina (fresh milk with cinnamon and lemon rind). Drinks and pastries from €3.50. Mon–Sat 9am–1.15pm & 5–9.15pm.

???
El Jardí C/l’Hospital 56 936 819 234; map. The “garden bar”, hidden in the elegant courtyard of the Gothic Hospital de la Santa Creu, is a real away-from-the-bustle find. Tables are arranged under the cool stone arches around a magical little garden, lit with candles and lanterns in the evenings. The menu features platters of cheese and hams, salads, sandwiches and a few simple tapas. Mon–Fri noon–midnight, Sat & Sun 1pm–midnight.

TAPAS BARS
???
Dos Palillos C/Elisabets 9 933 040 513, dospalillos.com; Catalunya; map. This hipster hangout is a flag-waver for Asian fusion tapas, which offers à la carte dim sum in the front bar (Cantonese caramelized walnuts to steamed dumplings, mostly €5–7) and a back-room, counter-style Asian bar where tasting menus (€80 and €95, reservations required) feature all the highlights. Tues & Wed 7.30–11.30pm, Thurs–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 7.30–11.30pm; closed 2 weeks in Jan & 3 weeks in Aug.

???
Dos Pebrots C/Doctor Dou 19 938 539 598, dospebrots.com; Catalunya; map. Around the corner from Dos Palillos is Albert Raurich’s love letter to Mediterranean cuisine. Once a favourite bar for poets and off-duty chefs, Dos Pebrots now uses historical dishes such as Roman garum (anchovy sauce) as the basis for contemporary tapas and small dishes (€4–9 each). Don’t miss the pigs’ nipples. Wed–Sun 1–11pm.

RESTAURANTS
!!!
Cera 23 C/Cera 23 934 420 808, cera23.com; Sant Antoni; map. Start your meal at this charming Galicia-meets-the-Mediterranean bistro with an effervescent blackberry mojito, and then tuck into market-fresh dishes like grilled duck with apples or a black rice-and-seafood “volcano” (mains €12–18). Mon & Sun 7–11pm, Tues–Sat 1–4pm & 7–11pm.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d2314335-Reviews-Cera_23-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

???
4amb5 Mujades Rambla de Raval 45 936 815 093, suculent.com/4amb5; Liceu; map. This not-quite-vegetarian restaurant puts prime, seasonal produce – often home-grown – in the spotlight. Some dishes include animal ingredients in supporting roles but it’s the vegetables you’ll applaud, in dishes such as fennel salad with apple and creamed goat’s cheese (€9). Wed–Mon 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm.

???
Romesco C/Sant Pau 28 933 189 381; facebook.com/romesco.restaurante; Liceu; map. As long as you accept the limitations (dining under strip-lights, gruff waiters) you can hardly go wrong, as the most expensive thing on the menu in this simple diner is a €10 grilled sirloin and most dishes go for €6 or less. Mon–Fri 1–11.30pm, Sat 1–4.30pm & 8–11.30pm; closed Aug.

SANT PERE
TAPAS BARS
???
Mosquito C/Carders 46 932 687 569, mosquitotapas.com; Jaume 1; map. A funky Asian tapas bar, festooned with hanging paper lanterns, which pours artisan beers and offers an authentic, made-to-order dim sum menu (dishes €3–5), from shrimp dumplings to tofu rolls. Mon 7.30pm–1am, Tues–Sun 1pm–1am.

RESTAURANTS
???
Casa Mari y Rufo C/Freixures 11 933 197 302; Jaume I; map. A great place for no-frills market cooking, with the busy family have turn out quick-fried sardines, grilled Catalan sausage, steak and chips and the like – or ask what’s good from the fish stalls that day. With lunch for an unbeatable €12 and dinner around €30, the locals know a good deal when they see one. Mon–Wed 1–6pm, Thurs & Fri 8pm–2am, Sat noon–2am.

???
Le Cucine Mandarosso C/Verdaguer i Callís 4, 932 690 780; Urquinaona; map. Naples meets Barcelona in this tiny space near the Via Laietana. It’s crowded and cramped but the top-value southern-Italian comfort food here is the real deal. The home-made cakes are so good you’ll buy more to take away. There are no reservations at lunchtimes so expect to queue with the locals for the chance to sample the €11 set menu. Tues–Sat 1.30pm–1am, Sun 1.30–5pm & 8pm–midnight.

LA RIBERA
TAPAS BARS
???
Cal Pep Pl. de les Olles 8 933 107 961, calpep.com; Barceloneta; map. You may have to queue for this famous tapas bar (there are no reservations), and prices are high for what’s effectively a bar meal (up to €60 a head), but it’s definitely worth it for the likes of impeccably fried squid, grilled monk fish, Catalan sausage and beans, and baby squid and chickpeas. Mon 7.30–11.30pm, Tues–Fri 1–3.45pm & 7.30–11.30pm, Sat 1.15–3.45pm; closed 3 weeks in Aug.

???
Mercat Princesa C/Flassaders 21, La Ribera 932 681 518, mercatprincesa.com; Jaume I; map. Enjoy food from more than a dozen gourmet stalls (think plump Chinese dumplings and artfully mounded montaditos; from €2.50) at communal tables inside a restored fourteenth-century palace’s interior courtyard. It’s a great option when your taste buds are pulling you in multiple directions. Mon–Thurs 1pm–midnight, Fri 1pm–12.30am, Sat 12.30pm–12.30am, Sun 12.30–11pm.

!!!
El Xampanyet C/Montcada 22 933 197 003; Jaume I; map. Traditional blue-tiled bar doing a roaring trade in sparkling cava, cider and tapas (anchovies are the speciality, but there’s also marinaded tuna, spicy mussels, sun-dried tomatoes, sliced meats and cheese). A drink and a couple of tapas will cost around €10. Tues–Sat noon–3.30pm & 7–11pm, Sun noon–3.30pm; closed Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d697571-Reviews-El_Xampanyet-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

RESTAURANTS
???
Senyor Parellada C/Argenteria 37 933 105 094, senyorparellada.com; Jaume I; map. An utterly gorgeous renovation of an eighteenth-century building is the mellow backdrop for genuine home-style Catalan cuisine – cuttlefish and cod, stuffed cabbage rolls, duck with figs. Most dishes cost between €8 and €15. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm.

BARCELONETA
TAPAS BARS
!!!
Cova Fumada C/Baluard 56 932 214 061; Barceloneta; map. Behind brown wooden doors on Barceloneta’s market square (there’s no sign), this rough-and-ready tavern may not look like much but the food’s great – tapas made with ingredients fresh from the market (€2–10), from griddled sardines to the house speciality bomba (spicy potato-meatball). Mon–Wed 9am–3.15pm, Thurs & Fri 9am–3.15pm & 6–8.10pm, Sat 9am–1.20pm; closed Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d943811-Reviews-La_Cova_Fumada-Barcelona_Catalonia.html



???
BARCELONA’S VEGETARIAN RESTAURANTS
???
La Báscula C/Flassaders 30 933 199 866; Jaume I; map. An old chocolate factory in the backstreets has been given a hippy-chic makeover by a local cooperative and serves up veggie pastas, turnovers, couscous, quiches and salads (dishes around €9). Wed–Sun 1–11pm.
???
Biocenter C/Pintor Fortuny 25 933 014 583, restaurantebiocenter.es; Liceu; map. One of the longest-running strictly veggie places in town, with a popular fixed-price lunch menu (€10.95, weekends €12.95). For dinner, they dim the lights, add candles and sounds, and turn out a few more exotic dishes, from seitan in a white-wine reduction to ginger tofu (mains around €12). Mon–Sat 1–11pm, Sun 1–4pm.
???
Sésamo C/Sant Antoni Abat 52 934 416 411; Sant Antoni; map. Classy tapas place (bar at the front, restaurant tables at the back) that offers up a heavily vegetarian-orientated chalkboard menu of innovative dishes – think strawberry-basil gazpacho, slow-roast tomato tart, or a daily risotto and pasta dish, all in the range €7–22. Tues–Sun 7pm–midnight.
???
Teresa Carles C/Jovellanos 2 933 171 829, teresacarles.com; Catalunya; map. Stylish vegetarian and vegan cuisine served in a hip – but most certainly not “hippy” – space with soaring ceilings, exposed-brick walls and soft, white lighting. The lunch menu (€10.50/€11.95 for two courses, €14.45 for three courses) is a great bargain, while à la carte offerings like artisanal pastas, a hearty seitan burger and vegan ceviche cost €9–12. Their second Barcelona outpost, Flax & Kale, is located nearby at C/Tallers 74. Daily 9am–11.30pm; brunch until 2pm.




RESTAURANTS
???
Can Majó C/Almirall Aixada 23 932 215 455, canmajo.es; Barceloneta; map. A lovely summer terrace by the beach promenade, where you can tuck into wonderful rice dishes, fideuà (noodles with seafood), suquet (fish stew) or grilled fish. Expect to pay €40–50 a head. Tues–Sat 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm, Sun 1–4pm.

!!!
Can Maño C/Baluard 12 933 193 082; Barceloneta; map. This old-fashioned diner is packed with noisy locals around formica tables. Expect fried or grilled fish, basic wine and absolutely no frills, but it’s an authentic experience, which should cost around €15 a head. Mon 8–11pm, Tues–Fri 8–11am, 12.15–4pm & 8–11pm, Sat 8–11am & 12.15–4pm; closed Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d931622-Reviews-Can_Mano-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

PORT OLÍMPIC
RESTAURANTS
???
Agua Pg. Marítim 30 932 251 272, grupotragaluz.com; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. By far the nicest boardwalk restaurant on the beachfront strip, perfect for brunch, with a seasonal, contemporary Mediterranean menu – grills, risotti, pasta, salads and tapas (most dishes €10–23). Mon–Thurs & Sun, Fri & Sat noon–12.30am.
POBLE SEC AND MONTJUÏC

TAPAS BARS
???
Casa de Tapas Cañota C/Lleida 7  933 259 171; casadetapas.com; Poble Sec; map. This colourful, family-friendly tapas bar is an ideal spot to refuel over-tired children after a visit to Montjüic’s Magic Fountain. Adults can unwind with a fresh, cold beer pulled from pressurized copper tanks. The tapas are above average in both quality and price. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.45pm & 8.30–10.45pm.

!!!
Espai Kru C/Lleida 7 934 248 152; espaikru.com; Poble Sec; map. Annexed to Cañota and upstairs from traditional – and extremely expensive – seafood restaurant Rías de Galicia, this creative restaurant gives deep-sea delicacies a more contemporary context. Expect cocktails, oysters and first-rate sashimi plus a handful of equally impressive meat dishes. Tues–Sat 1.30–4pm & 8–11pm, Sun 1.30–4pm.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d3783406-Reviews-Espai_Kru-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

!!!
Quimet i Quimet C/Poeta Cabanyes 25 934 423 142; Paral.lel; map. In Poble Sec’s cosiest tapas bar, little plates of classy finger-food (mostly €3–10) are served reverently from the minuscule counter – things like roast onions, marinaded mushrooms, stuffed cherry tomatoes and anchovy-wrapped olives. Mon–Fri noon–4pm & 7–10.30pm, Sat noon–4pm; closed Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d717377-Reviews-Quimet_Quimet-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

!!!
Tickets Avgda. Paral.lel 164; online reservations only on elbarriadria.com; Poble Sec; map. Swanky tapas bar under the star-studded helm of pastry-chef supremo Albert Adrià and his El Bulli-famed brother Ferran Adrià. It’s terrifically classy (dishes €5–20 each; expect to spend €70), but with only eighty covers a night, and online reservations up to two months in advance, you can’t guarantee a table. Tues–Fri 7–11pm, Sat 1–3.30pm & 7–11.30pm; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d2054462-Reviews-Tickets-Barcelona_Catalonia.html


RESTAURANTS
???
La Tomaquera C/Margarit 58, 675 902 389; Poble Sec; map. Chatter-filled tavern where the grilled chicken is sensational and the entrecôtes enormous (most mains €8–15). Locals limber up with an appetizer of pan-fried snails with chorizo and tomato. Tues–Sat 1–3.45pm & 8–11pm, Sun 1–3.45pm (closed Sun in June & July); closed Aug.

EIXAMPLE
TAPAS BARS
???
Tapas24 C/Diputació 269 934 880 977, carlesabellan.com; Passeig de Gràcia; map. Star chef Carles Abellan gets back to his roots at this basement tapas bar. There’s a reassuringly traditional feel that’s echoed in the menu – patatas bravas, Andalucian-style fried fish, meatballs, chorizo sausage and fried eggs. But the kitchen updates the classics too, so there’s also calamares romana (fried squid) dyed black with squid ink, or a burger with foie gras. Most tapas cost €4–16. There’s always a rush and a bustle at meal times, so be aware that you might have to queue. Mon–Sat 9am–midnight.

RESTAURANTS
!!!
Casa Calvet C/Casp 48 934 124 012, casacalvet.es; Catalunya/Urquinaona; map. The wonderfully decorated townhouse that a young Antoni Gaudí built for a Catalan industrialist makes for a truly glam night out. It offers a seasonally changing modern Catalan menu, with mains around the €30 mark, weekday lunch at €38 or tasting menus from €55 to €68. Mon–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8.30–11pm; closed Mon June–Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d697472-Reviews-Casa_Calvet-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

!!!
Cinc Sentits C/d’Aribau 58 933 239 490, cincsentits.com; Universitat; map. Contemporary Catalan cuisine that touches the “Five Senses” – the tasting menus (€100 and €120, matching wines available) use rigorously sourced wild fish, mountain lamb, seasonal vegetables, farmhouse cheeses and so on in elegant, pared-down dishes that are all about flavour. Food served Tues–Sat 1.30–2.30pm & 8.30–9.30pm; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d697497-Reviews-Cinc_Sentits-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

!!!
Disfrutar C/Villaroel 163 933 486 896, disfrutarbarcelona.com; Hospital Clinic; map. The hottest restaurant in Barcelona currently belongs to three former head chefs of the now-closed El Bulli, for many years considered the best in the world. The creativity here is off the charts. Tasting menus (starting at €110) are an endless procession of tiny delights that will make you smile and groan with pleasure, at least until the bill arrives. Food served Tues–Sat 1–2.30pm & 8–9.30pm.
La Falconera C/Enric Granados 58 607 704 923; Diagonal; map. The nose-to-tail stews, tapas and rustic rice dishes of this small restaurant seem out of place in the snazzy Eixample. But don’t be fooled by first impressions: the food packs a serious punch without sacrificing finesse. The €15 set lunch offers excellent value. Don’t miss the Olivier salad, a seductive take on a typically dull tapa. Mon & Tues noon–4pm & 7pm–midnight; Wed–Sat noon–midnight.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d7281314-Reviews-Disfrutar-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

!!!
La Flauta C/d’Aribau 23 933 237 038; Universitat; map. One of the city’s best-value lunch menus (€13) sees diners queuing for tables early – get there before 2pm to avoid the rush. Meals are served tapas-style, day and night (dishes €4–12), based on seasonal market produce, from wild mushrooms to locally landed fish. Mon–Sat 8am–1am; closed 3 weeks in Aug.
Sergi de Meià C/Arribau 106 931 255 710, restaurantsergidemeia.com; Universitat; map. Everything served here is organic, wild-caught or sustainably sourced but that doesn’t mean that ethics come before enjoyment. Sergi’s cooking is fun and flavoursome, influenced by his mother (who serves hearty breakfasts here) and by his time in top fine-dining restaurants. The €22.50 set lunch is a bargain but book ahead or expect to queue. Tues–Sat 9.30–11.30am, 1.30–3.30pm & 8–10.30pm.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d787824-Reviews-La_Flauta-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

GRÀCIA
TAPAS BARS
!!!
La Pepita C/Còrsega 343 932 384 893, lapepitabcn.com; Diagonal/Verdaguer; map. There’s usually a queue out the door here, and deservedly so. The tapas, like roasted-chicken croquettes with romesco sauce (€4), or aubergine fritters with goat’s cheese, honey and apples (€8), are fantastic, and the atmosphere is chatty and convivial. Hundreds of “love notes” scrawled by customers on the white-tiled walls attest to its popularity. Mon 7pm–midnight, Tues–Sat 1–4.30pm & 7.30pm–midnight.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d2151085-Reviews-La_Pepita-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

RESTAURANTS
???
Flash, Flash C/Granada del Penedès 25 932 370 990, flashflashbarcelona.com; Diagonal; map. A classic 1970s’ survivor, Flash, Flash does tortillas (€8–10) served any time you like, any way you like, from plain and simple to elaborately stuffed, with sweet ones for dessert. Chances are you’ll love the original white leatherette booths and monotone “models-with-cameras” cutouts – very Austin Powers. Daily 1pm–1.30am, bar open 11am–2am.

???
Goliard C/Progrés 932 073 175, goliard.cat; Diagonal; map. Smart but casual Goliard offers a pared-down dining experience in a contemporary foodie bistro that looks like it should cost three times as much. Although the menu is divided into starters and mains (most things €7.50–18.50), there are smaller portions available if you want to mix and match. Mon–Fri 1.30–3.30pm & 8.45–11.15pm, Sat 8.45–11.15pm.

???
La Singular C/Francesc Giner 50 932 375 098; Diagonal; map. The tiniest of kitchens turns out refined Mediterranean food at moderate prices – say, aubergine and smoked fish salad, or chicken stuffed with dates and ham, with most dishes costing €5–15. Mon–Fri 1.30–4pm & 8.30pm–midnight (Fri until 1am), Sat 8.30pm–1am; closed 2 weeks in Aug/Sept.



drinking and Nightlife

ESSENTIALS
Opening hours and closing days Most bars stay open until 2am, or 3am at weekends, while clubs tend not to open much before midnight and stay open until 5am, or even later at weekends – fair enough, as they’ve often barely got started by 3am. Unlike restaurants, bars and clubs generally stay open throughout August.
Admission charges Some clubs are free before a certain time, usually around midnight. Otherwise, expect to pay €10–20, though this usually includes your first drink (if there is free entry, don’t be surprised to find that there’s a minimum drinks’ charge of anything up to €10). Tickets for gigs run from €20 to €50 depending on the act, though there are cheaper gigs (€5–20) almost every night of the year at a variety of smaller clubs and bars.

THE GIN AND TONIC CRAZE
In Barcelona, they don’t let anything come between their gin and their tonic – not even the word “and”. The gintonic, as it’s known, has always been a favourite drink. In recent years, however, there’s been a surge in bars specializing in the classic cocktail and its star ingredient, ginebra, with spots such as Bobby Gin in Gràcia (see below), Dry Martini in Esquerra de L’Eixample (see below) and Xixbar in Poble Sec (see below) stocking a long list of brands. And the tonic component has not been forgotten, with bars pouring a dizzying array of premium varieties. It’s a refreshing trend worthy of a glass-clinking salut.

BARS
RAMBLAS
???
Bosc de les Fades Ptge. de la Banca 5 933 172 649, museocerabcn.com; Drassanes; map. Tucked away in an alley off the Ramblas, by the wax museum, the “Forest of the Fairies” is festooned with gnarled plaster tree trunks, fountains and stalactites. It’s a cheesy location for a cocktail or two. Mon–Fri 10am–1am, Sat 11am–1.30am, Sun 11am–1am.

BARRI GÒTIC
!!!
L’Ascensor C/Bellafila 3 933 185 347; Jaume I; map. Sliding, antique wooden elevator doors announce the entrance to “The Lift”, but it’s no theme bar – just an easy-going local hangout that’s great for a late-night drink. Daily 6pm–2.30am (until 3am Fri & Sat).
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Attraction_Review-g187497-d8763031-Reviews-L_Ascensor-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

???
Glaciar Pl. Reial 3 933 021 163, lareial.com; Liceu; map. At this traditional Barcelona meeting point the terrace seating is packed most sunny evenings and at weekends. Mon–Fri & Sun 11am–2am, Sat 11am–3am.

!!!
Milk C/Gignàs 21 932 680 922, milkbarcelona.com; Jaume I; map. Irish-owned bar and bistro that’s carved a real niche as a welcoming neighbourhood hangout. Get there early for the famously relaxed brunch (daily 9am–4.30pm); there’s also dinner and cocktails every night to a funky soundtrack. Mon–Thurs & Sun 9am–1am, Fri & Sat 9am–1.30am.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d1122768-Reviews-Milk_Bar_Bistro-Barcelona_Catalonia.html


EL RAVAL
???
23 Robadors Robador 23, 23robadors.wordpress.com Liceu; map. The tapas are lukewarm but the live jazz, blues and flamenco performances in this underground bar are red hot. Listen free from the bar or pay €4 to sit near the stage. It gets packed quickly, so arrive early or sharpen your elbows. Daily 8pm–3am.

???
Almirall C/Joaquin Costa 33 933 189 917, casaalmirall.com; Universitat; map. Dating from 1860, Barcelona’s oldest bar is a modernista design classic – check out the doors, counter and stupendous glittering bar. Mon–Wed 4.30pm–2am, Thurs–Sun noon–2.30am.

???
Betty Ford’s C/Joaquin Costa 56 933 041 368; Universitat; map. With a vibe somewhere between a student lounge and a beach bar, Betty’s is a bouncy place full of bouncy young things, sipping colourful cocktails and cold Australian beer. Sun & Mon 7pm–2.30am, Tues–Sat 1pm–2.30am.

!!!
Marmalade C/Riera Alta 4–6 934 423 966, marmaladebarcelona.com; Sant Antoni; map. The hugely glam face-lift for the old Muebles Navarro furniture store has resulted in big, church-like spaces and a backlit Art Deco bar that resembles a high altar. Cocktails, bistro meals and gourmet burgers pull in a relaxed dine-and-lounge crowd. There’s a popular weekend brunch. Mon–Thurs 6.30pm–1am, Fri & Sat 10am–1am, Sun 10am–1am (kitchen open until midnight daily).
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d4206591-Reviews-Marmalade_Barcelona-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

???
Marsella C/Sant Pau 65 934 427 263; Liceu; map. Authentic, atmospheric 1930s bar – named after the French port of Marseilles – that featured in Woody Allen’s Vicky Cristina Barcelona, so expect a spirited mix of film fans, oddball locals and young dudes. Daily 10pm–2.30am.

!!!
Resolis C/Riera Baixa 22 934 412 948; Sant Antoni; map. A cool hangout with decent tapas, where punters spill out of the door on to “secondhand clothes street” and a good time is had by all. Daily 7pm–2am (until 2.30am Fri & Sat).
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d3845458-Reviews-Resolis-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

SANT PERE
???
Ale&Hop C/Basses de Sant Pere 10, 931 269 094, aleandhop.com; Urquinaona; map. Ten rotating taps pour artisanal beers in all styles (porters, stouts, lagers, gluten-free) with names like “Dark Alliance” and “Sex-A-Pils”. There’s also a large selection of bottled beer, a crowd-pleasing vegetarian bar menu and a weekend brunch (served until 5pm). Mon–Wed 5pm–1.30am, Thurs 5pm–2.30am, Fri 5pm–3am, Sat 1pm–3am, Sun 11am–2am.

???
Casa Paco C/d’Allada Vermell 10 935 073 719; Jaume I; map. The barri’s signature bar is this cool music joint that’s a hit on the weekend DJ scene – the tagline “not a disco, just a bar with good music” says it all. Daily 9.30am–1am (until 3am Fri & Sat).

LA RIBERA
???
La Fianna C/Manresa 4 933 151 810, lafianna.com; Jaume I; map. Flickering candelabras, parchment lampshades, rough plaster walls and deep colours set the Gothic mood in this stylish lounge bar that’s “putting the beat in the Born”. Mon–Wed & Sun 6pm–2am, Thurs–Sat 6pm–3am.

???
La Vinya del Senyor Pl. Santa María 5 933 103 379; Jaume I; map. A great wine bar with front-row seats onto the lovely church of Santa María del Mar. The wine list is really good and there are classy tapas available. Mon–Thurs noon–1am, Fri & Sat noon–2am, Sun noon–midnight.

PORT VELL
!!!
Can Paixano C/Reina Cristina 7 933 100 839, canpaixano.com; Barceloneta; map. This crowded backstreet joint where the drink of choice – all right, the only drink – is cava (the Catalan answer to champagne) is a must on everyone’s itinerary. Don’t go thinking sophistication – the drinks might come in traditional champagne saucers (the sort of thing Dean Martin used to stack in a pyramid and then pour wine over), but this is a counter-only joint where there’s fizz, tapas and tapas-in-sandwiches and that’s your lot. And who could want more? Mon–Sat 9am–10.30pm; closed Easter week.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d940427-Reviews-Can_Paixano_La_Xampanyeria-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

POBLE SEC AND MONTJUÏC
???
Xixbar C/Rocafort 19 934 234 314, xixbar.com; Poble Sec; map. “Chicks” is an old granja (milk bar) turned candlelit, but completely unstuffy, cocktail bar. Gin’s the big drink here (they claim over one hundred varieties), and they even have their own specialist gin shop on site. Mon 6.30pm–2.30am, Tues–Wed 6pm–2.30am, Thurs 5pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 5pm–3am.

EIXAMPLE
!!!
Belchica C/Villaroel 60 625 814 001, facebook.com/belchica; Urgell; map. Barcelona’s first Belgian beer bar guarantees a range of decent brews (including hard-to-find Trappist ales). It’s also a muso’s joint, playing electronica, new jazz, lounge, reggae and other left-field sounds. Tues–Sun 6pm–2am (until 3am Fri & Sat).
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Attraction_Review-g187497-d5908434-Reviews-Belchica_Cafe-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

!!!
Dry Martini C/Aribau 166 932 175 072, drymartinibcn.com; Diagonal; map. White-jacketed bartenders, dark wood and brass fittings, a self-satisfied air – it could only be the city’s legendary uptown cocktail bar. Best drink to order? The clue’s in the bar’s name. Mon–Thurs 1pm–2.30am, Fri 1pm–3am, Sat 6.30pm–3am, Sun 6.30pm–2.30am.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Attraction_Review-g187497-d5907385-Reviews-Dry_Martini_by_Javier_De_Las_Muelas-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

???
Velódromo C/Muntaner 213 934 306 022; Hospital Clínic; map. A glam Art Deco gem, with a lofty, Parisian feel, a swooping staircase and a gleaming bar. It’s ideal for swish drinks and cocktails, though with fancy breakfasts, brunch and a tapas-and-bistro menu it’s also made for early starts and later dinners. Mon–Fri 7am–3am, Sat & Sun 6am–3am.

GRÀCIA
!!!
Bobby Gin C/Francisco Giner 47 933 681 892, bobbygin.com; Diagonal; map. A sign inside says “El gintonic perfecto no existe” (the perfect gin and tonic does not exist). Perhaps. But the sizeable G&Ts (from €8) here come very, very close. Mon–Wed & Sun 4pm–2am, Thurs–Sat 4pm–3am.
https://www.tripadvisor.ca/Restaurant_Review-g187497-d3188455-Reviews-Bobby_Gin-Barcelona_Catalonia.html

???
Cafè del Sol Pl. del Sol 16 934 155 663; cafedelsol.cat; Fontana; map. The granddaddy of the Pl. del Sol scene sees action day and night. On summer evenings, when the square is packed, there’s not an outdoor table to be had. Tues–Thurs 1pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 1pm–3am (kitchen closes at midnight).

???
Canigó C/Verde 2 932 133 049, barcanigo.com; Fontana; map. Family-run neighbourhood bar now entering its third generation. It’s not much to look at, but the drinks are cheap and it’s a real Gràcia institution, packed out at weekends with a young, hip and largely local crowd. Mon–Thurs 10am–2am, Fri 10am–3am, Sat 8pm–3am.

???
Virreina Pl. de la Virreina 1 932 379 880, virreinabar.com; Fontana; map. On one of the neighbourhood’s prettiest squares, with a very popular summer terrace. It’s one of those places where you drop by for a quick drink and find yourself staying for hours. Mon–Fri 9am–1am, Sat 10am–2am, Sun 10am–midnight.

SARRIÀ-SANT GERVASI
???
Gimlet C/Santaló 46 932 015 306, gimletbcn.com; FGC Muntaner; map. Especially popular in summertime, when the street-side tables offer a great vantage point for watching the party unfold. There are also two or three other late-opening bars on the same stretch. Mon–Wed 6pm–1am, Thurs 6pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 6pm–3am.


CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
BARRI GÒTIC
???
Jamboree Pl. Reial 17 933 191 789, masimas.com; Liceu; map. Nightly jazz gigs (from €12) pull in the crowds, while the wild Monday-night WTF jazz, funk and hip-hop jam session (from 8pm, €5) is a city fixture. The club kicks off after midnight (entry €10), playing funky sounds until the small hours. Gigs daily at 8pm & 10pm, club daily midnight–5am.

???
Karma Pl. Reial 10 933 025 680, karmadisco.com; Liceu; map. Old-school studenty basement place spinning indie, Britpop and US college, while a lively crowd gathers at the square-side bar and terrace. Club admission around €12. Tues–Sun midnight–5.30am.

???
La Macarena C/Nou de Sant Francesc 5 macarenaclub.com; Drassanes; map. Once a place where flamenco tunes were offered up to La Macarena, the Virgin of Seville – now a heaving temple to all things electro. Entry free until around 1am, then from €5. Mon–Thurs & Sun midnight–5am, Fri, Sat & hols midnight–6am.

???
Sidecar Pl. Reial 7 933 177 666, sidecarfactoryclub.com; Liceu; map. The old town’s hippest concert space has nightly gigs and DJs championing rock, indie, roots, electronica and fusion acts. Entry €7–10; gigs up to €20. Mon–Sat 7pm–5am, DJs at 12.30am.

EL RAVAL
???
Jazz Sí Club C/Requesens 2 933 295 667, tallerdemusics.com; Sant Antoni; map. Great for inexpensive (€5–10) gigs, every night from around 7.45pm or 8pm there’s something different, from rock, blues, jazz and jam sessions to the popular weekly Cuban (Thurs) and flamenco (Fri) nights. Daily 8–11.30pm.

???
Moog C/Arc del Teatre 3 933 017 282, masimas.com; Drassanes; map. One of the most influential clubs around for electronic sounds, playing techno, electro, drum’n’bass and trance to a cool but up-for-it crowd. Admission €10. Daily midnight–5am.

POBLE NOU
???
Sala Razzmatazz C/Pamplona 88 933 208 200, salarazzmatazz.com; Bogatell; map. Razzmatazz hosts the biggest in-town rock gigs, while at weekends the former warehouse turns into “five clubs in one”, spinning indie, rock, pop, techno, electro, retro and more, in variously named music bars like “The Loft”, “Pop Bar” or “Lolita”. Admission (€6–16 advance, €10–17 box office), gets you entrance to all the bars. Daily 1–6am.

POBLE SEC AND MONTJUÏC
???
Maumau C/Fontrodona 35 934 418 015, maumaunderground.com; Paral.lel; map. A great underground lounge-club, cultural centre and chill-out space with nightly film and video projections, exhibitions, and a roster of guest DJs playing deep, soulful grooves. Strictly speaking it’s a private club (annual admission €12), but they tend to let foreign visitors in for free. Thurs–Sat 9pm–2.45am.

???
Sala Apolo C/Nou de la Rambla 113 934 414 001, sala-apolo.com; Paral.lel; map. Old-time ballroom-turned-hip-concert-venue with gigs on two stages (local acts to big names) and an eclectic series of club nights with names to reckon with (Nasty Mondays, Crappy Tuesdays, etc). Gigs €10–35, club nights €11–16. Daily midnight–5am.

???
La Terrrazza Avgda. Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia, Poble Espanyol 687 969 825, laterrrazza.com; Espanya; map. Open-air summer club that’s the place to be in Barcelona. Nonstop dance, house and techno, though don’t get there until at least 3am, and be prepared for the style police. May–Oct Thurs–Sat 12.30–6am.

GRÀCIA
???
Heliogàbal C/Ramon y Cajal 80 heliogabal.com; Joanic; map. Not much more than a boiler room given a lick of paint, but filled with a cool, twenty-something crowd here for the live poetry and music. Recent licensing issues have meant that they have only been able to host small, acoustic sessions, which are always special, intimate events. Admission and drinks are inexpensive. Opening hours vary, and you’ll need to swing by to find out what’s on.

???
Otto Zutz C/Lincoln 15 932 380 722, ottozutz.com; FGC Gràcia; map. It first opened in 1985 and has since lost some of its glam cachet, but this three-storey former textile factory still has a shed-load of pretensions. Admission €18. Wed–Sun 11.45pm–6am.

LES CORTS
???
Bikini Avgda. Diagonal 547 933 220 800, bikinibcn.com; Les Corts/María Cristina; map. This traditional landmark of Barcelona nightlife offers a regular diet of great indie, rock, roots and world gigs, followed by club sounds. Admission €15–25, though some gigs up to €40. Thurs midnight–5am, Fri & Sat midnight–6am, Sun 7pm–midnight.




Shopping
While not on a par with Paris or the world’s other style capitals, Barcelona still leads the way in Spain when it comes to shopping. It’s 

CLOTHES, SHOES AND ACCESSORIES
New designers can be found in the medieval streets and alleys of La Ribera, around Pg. del Born, but also down C/d’Avinyó in the Barri Gòtic, between C/Carme and MACBA in El Raval, and along C/Verdi in Gràcia. For secondhand and vintage clothing, stores line the whole of C/Riera Baixa (El Raval), with others nearby on C/Carme and C/l’Hospital, and on Saturdays there’s a street market there.
La Comercial C/Rec 73, La Ribera 933 192 435, lacomercial.info; Jaume I; map. Five boutiques plus a showroom – all clustered around C/Rec – comprise the fabulous La Comercial, which carries a carefully curated selection of on-trend men’s and women’s fashion, fragrances and chic home decor. Mon–Thurs 11am–9pm, Fri & Sat 11am–9.30pm.
Coquette C/Rec 65, La Ribera 933 192 976, coquettebcn.com; Jaume I; map. A beautiful space, with high ceilings, velvet curtains and a vast mother-of-pearl chandelier, Coquette specializes in feminine but unfussy fashion for women, with pieces from French and Spanish designers such as Isabel Marant, Anthology Paris and Intropia. The clothes are complemented by a small but carefully chosen selection of bags, shoes and jewellery, many of which have an appealing vintage feel. Their second boutique, at C/Bonaire 5, also has men’s fashion, and there’s a third shop uptown at C/Madrazo 153. Mon–Fri 11am–3pm & 5–9pm, Sat 11.30am–9pm.
Custo Barcelona Pl. de les Olles 7, La Ribera 932 687 893, custo.com; Barceloneta; map. Where the stars get their T-shirts. Hugely colourful designer tops and sweaters for men and women. Last season’s gear gets another whirl at the Pl. del Pi discount outlet in the Barri Gòtic. Mon–Sat 10am–9pm, Sun noon–8pm.
La Manual Alpargatera C/d’Avinyó 7, Barri Gòtic 933 010 172, lamanualalpargatera.com; Liceu; map. Traditional workshop making alpargatas (espadrilles) to order, as well as other straw, rope and basketwork. Mon–Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 4.30–8pm.
Petit Gegant C/Parlament 65, Sant Antoni 933 297 516, facebook.com/petitgegant; Poble Sec; map. Located on what is currently Barcelona’s coolest street, this small boutique, hung with bunting and balloons, is a yummy mummy’s dream. Kit out your tot in colourful, stylish designs (age range 0–8), with funky T-shirts, sleepsuits and leggings, plus bibs, muslins and organic lotions. Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8.15pm.
DEPARTMENT STORES AND MALLS
Note that cafés and leisure outlets in malls often open later than the shop hours given below, and on Sunday.
Arenas de Barcelona Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 373–385, Eixample 932 890 244, arenasdebarcelona.com; Espanya; map. This designer mall is a glam refit of a former bullring, and while it’s bigger on leisure facilities than shops and boutiques, you won’t want to miss the view from the circular rooftop promenade. Mon–Sat 10am–10pm.
DESIGN AND STYLE
Cubiña C/Mallorca 291, Eixample 934 765 721, cubinya.es; Verdaguer; map. The building itself is stupendous – Domènech i Montaner’s modernista Casa Thomas – while inside holds the very latest in household design, from slinky CD racks to €5000 dining tables. Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4.30–8.30pm.
FOOD AND DRINK
The main local supermarket chain is Caprabo (caprabo.com), which has a useful branch in the Mercat de la Barceloneta, though most other branches are located in residential neighbourhoods, away from the tourist sights. The most convenient downtown supermarket is that in the basement of El Corte Inglés (Pl. de Catalunya), and there’s also a Carrefour Market at Ramblas 113.
Bubó C/Caputxes 10, La Ribera 932 687 224, bubo.es; Jaume I; map. There are chocolates and then there are Bubó chocolates – jewel-like creations and playful desserts by pastry maestro Carles Mampel. Mon–Thurs & Sun 10am–10pm, Fri & Sat 10am–midnight.
Casa Gispert C/Sombrerers 23, La Ribera 933 197 535, casagispert.com; Jaume I; map. Roasters of nuts, coffee and spices for over 150 years. It’s a truly delectable store of wooden boxes, baskets, stacked shelves and tantalizing smells. Tues–Sat 10am–8.30pm.
La Colmena Pl. Àngel 12, Barri Gòtic 933 151 356, pastisserialacolmena.com; Jaume I; map. Established in 1849, “the hive” has a huge range of traditional Catalan cakes, pastries and sweets prettily displayed in wooden cabinets in its carefully preserved interior. In autumn, try the panellets (marzipan balls, often covered with pine nuts), or choose a bag of daintily wrapped sweets that have been handmade to the same recipe for well over a century. Daily 9am–9pm.
Entre Latas C/Parlament 7, Sant Antoni 930 154 725, entrelatas-bcn.com; Jaume I; map. A truly charming shop, with beautifully arranged displays of stylishly packaged gourmet tinned goods, from smoked sardines from Riga to razor clams from Galicia. To accompany them, pick up a box of artisan crackers and a bottle of vermouth, all with equally attractive packaging. Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 5–8.30pm, Sat 11am–2pm & 5–8.30pm.
Formatgeria La Seu C/Daguería 16, Barri Gòtic 934 126 548, formatgerialaseu.com; Jaume I; map. Chatty Scottish owner Katherine is usually on hand to advise about her best farmhouse cheeses, and you can try before you buy with a €3 tasting plate. Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8pm; closed Aug.
Forn Baluard C/Baluard 38–40, Barceloneta 932 211 208, baluardbarceloneta.com; Barceloneta; map. There are scores of bakeries in Barcelona, but when push comes to shove, foodies pick the Baluard, right next to Barceloneta market, whose passion for artisan bread, cakes and pastries knows no bounds. Mon–Sat 8am–9pm.
Papabubble C/Ample 28, Barri Gòtic 933 196 608, papabubble.com; Drassanes; map. Groovy young things rolling out home-made candy to a chill-out soundtrack. Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 4–8.30pm, Sat 10am–8.30pm; closed Aug.
Vila Viniteca C/Agullers 7 & 9, La Ribera 902 327 777, vilaviniteca.es; Barceloneta; map. A very knowledgeable specialist in Catalan and Spanish wines. Pick your vintage and then nip over the road for the gourmet deli part of the operation. Mon–Sat 8.30am–8.30pm (closes Sat at 2.30pm in July & Aug).
MUSIC
Independent music and CD stores are concentrated around C/Tallers (El Raval), off the Ramblas.
Revólver Records C/Tallers 11, El Raval 934 126 248, revolverrecords.es; Catalunya; map. Revólver sells the city’s best selection of vinyl at the lowest prices. Defiantly old-school, it’s a record shop like they used to make them. It’s next door to its near-identically named but separately run sister shop, Discos Revólver. Mon–Sat 10am–8.30pm.
Wah Wah Discos C/Riera Baixa 14, El Raval 934 423 703, www.wah-wahsupersonic.com; Liceu; map. Vinyl heaven for record collectors – rock, indie, garage, 1970s punk, electronica, blues, folk, prog, jazz, soul and rarities of all kinds. Mon–Sat 11am–2pm & 5–8.30pm.
directory
Left luggage Barcelona Sants station (daily 5.30am–11pm; €4–6). Bag Drop Service has three city-centre locations: C/Rosselló 399, Sagrada Família; C/Mèxic 15, Pl. Espanya; and C/Joan Güell 54, Sants (all 640 768 090, bdsbarcelona.com; from €5). They can also transfer luggage directly to the airport or other city location. You can also prebook through the Barcelona tourist office (bcnshop.barcelonaturisme.com).
Pharmacies Usual hours are weekdays 9am–1pm and 4–8pm. At least one in each neighbourhood is open daily 24hr (and marked as such) – a convenient central option is Farmacia Clapies, Ramblas 98 (933 012 843, farmacia1925.com).
Police Guàrdia Urbana station at Ramblas 43, opposite Pl. Reial (932 562 430; Liceu; 24hr; English spoken). To get a police report for your insurance, go to the Mossos d’Esquadra (Catalan police force) station at C/Nou de la Rambla 76–80, El Raval (933 062 300; Paral.lel) – take your passport as proof of ID. Contact the police on: Mossos d’Esquadra 112, Policía Nacional 091, Guàrdia Urbana 092.
Post offices The main post office (Correus) is on Pl. d’Antoni López, Barri Gòtic 934 868 302, correos.es, Barceloneta/Jaume I (Mon–Fri 8.30am–9.30pm, Sat 8.30am–2pm).
Swimming pools The city’s most spectacular pool is the open-air Piscina Municipal de Montjuïc, Avgda. Miramar 31, Montjuïc, Funicular de Montjuïc (mid-June to early Sept daily 11am–6.30pm; €6.50, €4.50 children aged 6–14). Indoor and outdoor beachside pools at Club Natació Atlètic Barceloneta, Pl. del Mar, Barceloneta (Mon–Fri 6.30am–11pm, Sat 7am–11pm, Sun 8am–5pm, until 8pm mid-May to Sept; full-day €12.53).
Telephone offices Locutorios, which specialize in discounted overseas connections, are scattered through the old city, particularly in El Raval.
< Back to Barcelona


Montserrat
The mountain of Montserrat, with its strangely shaped crags of rock, its monastery and ruined hermitage caves, stands just 40km northwest of Barcelona, off the road to Lleida. It’s the most popular day-trip from the city, reached in around ninety minutes by train and then cable car or rack railway for a thrilling ride up to the monastery. Once there, you can visit the basilica and monastery buildings, and complete your day with a walk around the woods and crags, using the two funicular railways that depart from the monastery complex. Inevitably, both monastery and mountain are ruthlessly advertised as a tourist trip from the city or the Costa Brava, while the main pilgrimages take place on April 27 and September 8, but don’t be put off – the place itself is still magical and well worth a visit.
Monestir de Montserrat
Legends hang easily upon Montserrat. Fifty years after the birth of Christ, St Peter is said to have deposited an image of the Virgin carved by St Luke in one of the mountain caves. The so-called Black Virgin (La Moreneta) icon was subsequently lost in the early eighth century, after being hidden during the Muslim invasion, but reappeared in 880, accompanied by the customary visions and celestial music. A chapel was built to house it, superseded in 976 by a Benedictine monastery, the Monestir de Montserrat, set at an altitude of nearly 1000m. Miracles abounded and the Virgin of Montserrat soon became the chief cult image of Catalunya and a pilgrimage centre second in Spain only to Santiago de Compostela. Its fortunes declined in the nineteenth century, though in recent decades Montserrat’s popularity has again become established. Today, in addition to the tourists, tens of thousands of newly married couples come here to seek La Moreneta’s blessing.
The monastery’s various outbuildings – including hotel and restaurant, post office, souvenir shop, self-service cafeteria and bar – fan out around an open square, and there are extraordinary mountain views from the terrace.
MONTSERRAT BOYS’ CHOIR
Montserrat is awash in spirituality – but never more so than when the Montserrat’s world-famous boys’ choir sings. Time your visit to hear the boys’ soaring voices fill the basilica (Mon–Fri 1pm, Sun at noon & 6.45pm). The choir belongs to the Escolania (escolania.cat), a choral school established in the fourteenth century and unchanged in musical style since its foundation. One of the oldest boy’s choirs in Europe, the Escolania is comprised of boys aged 9 to 14 who receive a rigorous music-focused education at Monsterrat. Unlike its famous European counterparts, the choir has rarely toured abroad – that is, until recently. After performing in the US for the first time in 2014, the choir returned in 2017, making appearances on both coasts.
Basílica
Basilica Daily 7.30am–8pm; access to La Moreneta 8–10.30am & noon–6.30pm; mid-July to Sept also 7.30–8pm • Boys’ choir Mon–Fri 1pm, Sun at noon & 6.45pm • Free
Of the religious buildings, only the Renaissance Basílica is open to the public. La Moreneta stands above the high altar, and the approach to this beautiful icon reveals the enormous wealth of the monastery, as you queue along a corridor leading through the back of the basilica’s rich side chapels. The best time to visit the basilica is when Montserrat’s world-famous boys’ choir sings.
Museu de Montserrat
Museu de Montserrat April to mid-June & mid-Sept to Oct Mon–Fri 10am–5.45pm, Sat & Sun 10am–6.45pm; mid-June to mid-Sept daily 10am–6.45pm; Nov–March daily 10am–5.45pm • €7 • 938 777 745, museudemontserrat.com • Espai Audiovisual Mon–Fri 9am–5.45pm, Sat & Sun 9am–6.45pm • €6
The Museu de Montserrat presents a few archeological finds brought back by travelling monks, together with paintings and sculpture dating from as early as the thirteenth century, including works by Old Masters, French Impressionists and Catalan modernistas. There’s also a collection of Byzantine icons, though other religious items are in short supply as many of the monastery’s valuables were carried off by Napoleon’s troops, who sacked the complex in 1811.
Mountain walks
Funicular departures vary by season, but mostly every 20min, 10am–5pm • Santa Cova €5 return, Sant Joan €12.50 return, combination ticket €16
Following the mountain tracks to the nearby caves and hermitages, you can contemplate Goethe’s observation of 1816: “Nowhere but in his own Montserrat will a man find happiness and peace.” One funicular drops to the path for Santa Cova, a seventeenth-century chapel built where the La Moreneta icon is said to have been found. It’s an easy walk there and back, which takes less than an hour. The other funicular rises steeply to the hermitage of Sant Joan, from where it’s a tougher 45-minute walk to the Sant Jeroni hermitage, and another fifteen minutes to the Sant Jeroni summit at 1236m.
Arrival and Information: Montserrat
There are two ways to reach Montserrat by public transport: either by cable car or mountain railway, but in the first instance you need to take the FGC train (line R5, direction Manresa), which leaves Barcelona’s Pza. d’Espanya (Espanya) daily at hourly intervals from 8.36am.

By cable car Get off the train at Montserrat Aeri (50min) for the connecting cable car, the Aeri de Montserrat (departures every 15min, March–Oct daily 9.40am–2pm & 2.35–7pm, Nov–Feb daily 10.10am–2pm & 2.35–5.45pm; 938 350 005, aeridemontserrat.com). You may have to queue for 15min or so, but then it’s an exhilarating 5min swoop up the sheer mountainside to a terrace just below the monastery.
By mountain railway The Montserrat mountain railway, the Cremallera de Montserrat (departures hourly, daily 8.48am–5.38pm, until 7.38pm at weekends April–Oct plus daily July–Sept; 932 051 515, cremallerademontserrat.cat), departs from Monistrol de Montserrat (the next stop after Montserrat Aeri, another 5min), and takes 20min to complete the climb.
Tickets Return through-tickets from Barcelona cost around €21, either for the train/cable car or train/mountain railway. There are also two combination tickets available: the Trans Montserrat (€31.80), which includes all transport services, including unlimited use of the mountain funiculars, and entry to the audiovisual exhibit; and the Tot Montserrat (€49.95), which includes the same plus monastery museum entry and a cafeteria lunch.
By car Take the A2 motorway as far as the Martorell exit, and then follow the N11 and C55 to the Montserrat turn-off – or park at either the cable-car or the mountain-railway station and take the rides up instead. All-in cable-car/cremallera/Montserrat attraction combo tickets are available at the station for drivers who park-and-ride.
Visitor Centre 938 777 701, montserratvisita.com; daily 9am–5.30pm, Sat, Sun & July–Sept until 6.45pm. You can pick up maps of the complex and mountain here, and staff can also advise about the accommodation options.
< Back to Barcelona





=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================





medieval city of Girona 
Empordà wine region
Cadaqués
Figueres contains the Teatre-Museu Dalí
fine beach at Sitges 
attractive coastal town of Tarragona
appealing cava vineyards around Sant Sadurní d’Anoia 
romantic monastery of Poblet 
enjoyable provincial capital of Lleida


Highlights
1 Empordà wine country Sip your way through the scenic vineyards of the up-and-coming wine region of Empordà, where new, small-batch wineries are turning out award-winning vintages.

2 Cadaqués Experience the Costa Brava as it once was at this lovely, quirky seaside town.

3 Girona This beautiful, labyrinthine city boasts a two-thousand-year-old history, including one of the best-preserved medieval Jewish quarters in the country.

4 El Celler de Can Roca Feast on elevated Catalan cuisine at this handsome restaurant helmed by the Roca brothers, which is consistently voted as one of the best in the world.

5 Teatre-Museu Dalí Explore the life and work of the flamboyant artist at this shrine to Surrealism.

6 Skiing Baqueira-Beret Grab the ski poles: this premiere ski resort offers the finest skiing in the Pyrenees, if not in Spain.

7 Sitges Sample the frenetic nightlife or, better still, the Carnaval, of chic Sitges.

8 Roman Tarragona This ancient city reveals some of the country’s most important remains of the Roman occupation.

Highlights are marked on the Catalunya map

< Back to Catalunya


Brief history
The Catalan people have an individual and deeply felt historical and cultural identity, seen most clearly in the language, which takes precedence over Castilian on street names and signs. Despite being banned for over thirty years during the Franco dictatorship, Catalan survived behind closed doors and has staged a dramatic comeback since the Generalísimo’s death. As in the Basque Country, though, regionalism goes back much farther than this.
Early origins to the twentieth century
On the expulsion of the Moors in 874, Guifré el Pelós (Wilfred the Hairy) established himself as the first independent Count of Barcelona; his kingdom flourished and the region became famous for its seafaring, mercantile and commercial skills, characteristics that to some extent still set the region apart. In the twelfth century came union with Aragón, though the Catalans kept many of their traditional, hard-won rights (usatges). From then until the fourteenth century marked Catalunya’s Golden Age, and in 1359 the Catalan Generalitat – Europe’s first parliamentary government – was established.
In 1469, through the marriage of Fernando V (of Aragón) to Isabel I (of Castile), the region was added on to the rest of the emergent Spanish state. Throughout the following centuries the Catalans made various attempts to secede from the stifling grasp of central bureaucracy, which saw the Catalan enterprise as merely another means of filling the state coffers. Early industrialization, which was centred here and in the Basque Country, only intensified political disaffection, and in the 1920s and 1930s anarchist, communist and socialist parties all established major power bases in Catalunya.
The Civil War and Franco
In 1931, after the fall of the dictator General Primo de Rivera, a Catalan Republic was proclaimed and its autonomous powers guaranteed by the new Republican government. Any incipient separatism collapsed, however, with the outbreak of the Civil War, during which Catalunya was a bastion of the Republican cause, Barcelona holding out until January 1939. In revenge, Franco pursued a policy of harsh suppression, attempting to wipe out all evidence of Catalan cultural and economic primacy. Among his more subtle methods was the encouragement of immigration from other parts of Spain in order to dilute regional identity. Even so, Catalunya remained obstinate, the scene of protests and demonstrations throughout the dictatorship, and after Franco’s death a Catalan government was formally reinstated in 1979. This, the semi-autonomous Generalitat, enjoys a high profile and continues to extend its power.
The independence movement
The last half-decade has seen a powerful resurgence in the pro-independence movement. In 2012, there were mass demonstrations of 1.5 million people in Barcelona on September 11, Catalunya’s national day. On September 11, 2013, hundreds of thousands formed a human chain, from the northern to southern borders of the region, to promote Catalan autonomy. In November 2014, Catalunya held a nonbinding independence vote – 80 percent of voters backed independence, but the Spanish courts declared this vote illegal. A year later, in November 2015, Catalan politicians voted for a resolution aimed at developing an independent nation by 2017. On September 11, 2016, hundreds of thousands rallied to support Catalunya’s secession from Spain. On October 1, 2017, Catalunya held a long-anticipated and controversial referendum on independence. The Madrid government, with legal support from the Spanish courts, had pronounced the referendum to be unconstitutional. It turned into a day of reckoning: the Spanish national police launched a crackdown across the region, resulting in violent clashes. At the time of this writing, the country has been submerged into a political plight with no clear outcome, though it’s clear that pro-independence sentiments will continue to dominate Catalunya’s – and Spain’s – identity.
CATALÀ
Learning a few phrases in Catalan will take you far in Catalunya. Català has more or less taken over from Castilian, a phenomenon known as the venganza (revenge), though few visitors realize how ingrained and widespread the language is and sometimes commit the error of calling it a dialect. On paper, Català looks like a cross between French and Spanish and is generally easy to understand if you know those two but, spoken, it has a distinct, rounded sound and is far harder to come to grips with, especially away from Barcelona, where accents are stronger.
When Franco came to power, publishing houses, bookshops and libraries were raided and Català books destroyed. While this was followed by a let-up in the mid-1940s, the language was still banned from the radio, TV, daily press and, most importantly, schools, which is why many older people today cannot necessarily write Català (even if they speak it all the time). As for Castilian, in Barcelona virtually everyone can speak it, while in country areas, many people can sometimes only understand it but not speak it.
Català is spoken in Catalunya proper, part of Aragón, much of Valencia, the Balearic Islands, the Principality of Andorra and in parts of the French Pyrenees, albeit with variations of dialect (it is thus much more widely spoken than several better-known languages such as Danish, Finnish and Norwegian). It is a Romance language, stemming from Latin and, more directly, from medieval Provençal and lemosi, the literary French of Occitania. Spaniards in the rest of the country tend to belittle it by saying that to get a Català word you just cut a Castilian one in half. In fact, the grammar is much more complicated than Castilian, and the language has eight vowel sounds (including three diphthongs). In the text we’ve tried to keep to Català names (with Castilian in parentheses where necessary) – not least because street signs and turisme maps are in Català. Either way, you’re unlikely to get confused as the difference is usually only slight: ie Girona (Gerona) and Lleida (Lérida). There’s a Catalan glossary to help you further.
< Back to Catalunya
The Costa Brava
Stretching from Blanes, 60km north of Barcelona, to the French border, the Costa Brava (Rugged Coast) is often maligned for its droves of visitors – and attendant mass-tourism infrastructure. But beyond the crowds, the Costa Brava still reveals the “rugged” in its name: wooded coves, high cliffs, gorgeous beaches and deep-blue water. Though it continues to struggle under its image as the first developed package-tour coast in Spain, the Costa Brava is very determinedly moving on to new horizons. The old sangría-and-chips image is evolving into a greater focus on the area’s natural beauty and fascinating cultural heritage.
Broadly, the coast is split into three areas: La Selva at the southern tip, clustered around brash Lloret de Mar, and the medieval walled town of Tossa de Mar; the stylish central area of Baix Empordà between Sant Feliu de Guíxols and Pals, popular with the chic Barcelona crowd, which boasts some wonderfully scenic stretches of rolling coastline around Palamós, the beaches and villages of inland Palafrugell and hilltop Begur; and the more rugged Alt Empordà in the north. This area is marked by the broad sweep of the Golf de Roses, site of a nature reserve, the Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’Empordà, and the alluring peace of the ancient Greek and Roman settlement of Empúries, and extends to the bohemian Cadaqués, which attracts an arty crowd paying tribute to Salvador Dalí; the artist lived most of his life in the labyrinthine warren of converted fishermen’s huts in a neighbouring cove, now a fabulous museum.
Getting around: Costa Brava
By car Driving is the easiest way to get around and gives you access to some of the more remote parts of the coast, though expect the smaller coastal roads to be very busy in summer and parking to be tricky in the major towns.
By bus Buses in the region are almost all operated by Sarfa (sarfa.com), which has offices in the bigger towns and offers an efficient service the length of the coast. Teisa (teisa-bus.com) also operates some routes in the area. You could consider using Girona or Figueres as a base for lateral trips to the coast, as both have big bus termini and are within an hour of the beach.
By train The train from Barcelona to the French border runs inland most of the time, serving Girona and Figueres, but emerging on the coast itself only at Llançà. The AVE train, which is faster but pricier, operates from Perpignan in France to Figueres and on to Barcelona.
By boat Between Easter and September, there are daily boat services (cruceros), which cover short hops along the coast; there are generally services between Lloret de Mar, Tossa de Mar and Sant Feliu de Guíxols, among other coastal towns. Tourist offices have up-to-date information on companies and schedules; timetables and routes can vary yearly.
By foot You can access some of the lovelier coves by walking all or just parts of the fabulous Camí de Ronda necklace of footpaths that runs along almost all of the coastline.
Lloret de Mar
Brash, tourist-magnet LLORET DE MAR, some 66km northeast of Barcelona, is everything you’ve ever heard about it – and more. Yet underneath its undeniable beach-driven commercialism and gaudy nightlife is a centuries-old town trying to make itself known. The result is a mix of hedonism and history, with music-pumping disco clubs clustered around a delightful fifteenth-century church, anonymous high-rises alongside genteel mansions and a packed main beach that belies some splendid rocky coves tucked away on either side of town. Lloret’s main beach and neighbouring Fenals beach is where many of the hotels are grouped; the south end of Fenals, backed by pine woods, is somewhat less crowded. Farther afield are a number of tiny coves favoured by local bathers. Cala Santa Cristina and the adjacent Cala Treumal are the best, while the lovely Cala Boadella is popular with nudists; all are off the Blanes road. Any sightseeing in Lloret is centred on the warren of streets in the old town, amid the hustle of T-shirt shops and tourist paraphernalia.
Church of Sant Romà and Capella del Santíssim
Pza. de l’Església • Sant Romà Open for services only • Capella del Santíssim Daily 10am–2pm & 5–8pm; confirm with turisme
Holding court over the old town is the colourful church of Sant Romà, originally built in Gothic style in 1522. A modernista renovation was begun in 1914, but much of this work was destroyed in the Civil War; only the adjacent Capella del Santíssim, with its Byzantine cupolas, Mudéjar and Renaissance influences, remains.
Museu del Mar
Pg. Camprodon i Arrieta • March to mid-June, mid-Sept to Oct Mon–Sat 9am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm & 4–7pm; mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 10am–1pm & 4–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm & 4–7pm; Nov–Feb Mon–Sat 9am–1.30pm & 3.30–6pm, Sun 9am–2pm; last admission usually 45min before closing time • €4 • 972 364 454, lloretdemar.org
Explore Lloret’s maritime legacy – illustrated by ship models, a replica of an 1848 figurehead and photos and mementoes – as well as other aspects of the town’s history in the well-run Museu del Mar. The museum shares space with one of the town’s turisme in Can Garriga, a beautifully restored nineteenth-century mansion on the town’s stately promenade.
Jardins de Santa Clotilde
Daily: April–Oct 10am–8pm; Nov–Jan 10am–5pm; Feb–March 10am–6pm; last admission 1hr before closing time • €5
On a headland above the coast, southwest of town, are the surprisingly tranquil Jardins de Santa Clotilde, ornamental gardens laid out in modernista style in 1919 and offering fabulous views over the Mediterranean. In spring and summer, you can sometimes catch live jazz on the weekends in the gardens; ask at the turisme for details.
Cementiri Modernista de Lloret de Mar
Cami del Repòs • Daily: April–Oct 8am–8pm, Nov–March 8am–6pm • 972 349 573
Head beyond the thronged beaches and noisy bars, and your reward is the quiet Cementiri Modernista de Lloret de Mar just west of the town centre. Created in 1901, this impressive cemetery features funerary art by an astonishing line-up of modernista greats, including Josep Puig I Cadafalch (see box, 666), Antoni M. Gallisà i Soqué and Eusebi Arnau. Many of the lavish mausoleums were commissioned by Indianos, which is the term for locals who left the Costa Brava in the 1800s to seek fortune in the Americas – mostly Cuba. While many didn’t find riches abroad, those who did often returned to build grand mansions and, in the case of this cemetery, mausoleums.
Arrival and information: Lloret de Mar
By bus The bus station is north of the town centre, on Carretera de Blanes. As well as frequent services from nearby Tossa, there are regular buses from Barcelona (8–10 daily; 1hr 15min), Girona (5–6 daily; 1hr 20min), Palafrugell (2–4 daily; 1hr) and Platja d’Aro (2–4 daily; 50min), among others.
By boat Cruceros and other coastal boats dock at the beach, which is where the ticket offices are too. In summer there are around a dozen daily services up and down the coast.
Turisme The most central turisme is on the seafront at Pg. Camprodon i Arrieta 1 (March to mid-June Mon–Sat 9am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun 9am–2pm; mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 9am–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm & 4–7pm; mid-Sept to Oct Mon–Sat 9am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm & 4–7pm; Nov–Feb daily 9am–1.30pm & 3–6pm, Sun 9am–2pm; 972 364 735, lloretdemar.org).
Accommodation and eating
Llloret is undeniably a tourist town, with a slew of large hotel-resorts. But gone are the days of noisy pools and bland rooms. Thanks to stiff competition, Lloret’s high-rise hotels have been improving over the years, with an enhancement in services, amenities and decor. Plus, you’ll also find decent smaller spots in the old part of town, not far from the beach.

Though Lloret may be the domain of fast-food joints and fish and chips, there’s still a reasonably good choice of places to eat in the old town. Clubs are mainly centred around Avda. Just Marlés, the main road into town running perpendicular to the seafront, while lively bars dot the streets around Pl. d’Espanya and Pl. del Carme, just behind the beach.

Aqua Hotel Bertran Park Avda. del Mar 16 937 678 211, aquahotel.com. Straightforward, well-maintained hotel that’s in a quieter section of the town centre – away from the party crowds, but close enough to stroll to the beach. Sizeable rooms are comfortable and clean, plus there’s a swimming pool and buffet restaurant. 95
Can Bolet Sant Mateu 6 972 371 237, canbolet.com. With all the tourist restaurants that dominate Lloret, it’s easy to forget that there are many family eateries with a long history – and Can Bolet is one of them. Founded in 1961, this welcoming restaurant serves classic Catalan dishes, including fideuà (a dish of traditional thin noodles). Dishes €11–18. Tues–Sat noon–4pm & 8–11.30pm, Sun noon–4pm.
Hotel Santa Marta Platja de Santa Cristina 972 364 904, hstamarta.com. A tranquil escape, this luxurious hotel sits above a quiet beach and the Ermita de Santa Cristina, between Lloret and Blanes, with elegant rooms and lovely views of the sea. €195
Sant Pere del Bosc Hotel & Spa Paratge de Sant Pere del Bosc, 5km inland from Lloret de Mar 972 361 248, wsantperedelboschotel.com. For an elegant change of pace, relax at this historic Catalan modernista boutique hotel. Handsome individually decorated rooms, named after flowers, poets and singers, have lovely views – some of the Mediterranean, and others of the leafy gardens. Ease into the evening at the inviting restaurant, which serves stellar traditional Catalan cuisine with a twist, like spinach cannelloni with romesco sauce and cod with chickpea puree (mains from €18). Daily 8.30am–11pm. €180
Tossa de Mar
Tossa de Mar is quite a sight upon arrival by boat: medieval walls and the turrets of the old quarter, Vila Vella, rise pale and shimmering on the hill above the modern town. Tossa has managed to escape the full-blown tourism of Lloret, 13km to the south, and balances comfortably between restful holiday hub and working town. Founded originally by the Romans, the town has twelfth-century walls that surround the old quarter – a maze of cobbled streets, whitewashed houses and flower boxes – and climb the headland, offering terrific views over beach and bay.
Tossa’s best beach is the Platja de la Mar Menuda, around the headland away from the old town and very popular with divers; look for a natural pink cross in the rock, supposedly marking where Sant Ramon de Penyafort gave a dying man his absolution in 1235. The central Platja Gran, though pleasant, gets crowded; if you have your own transport, make for the tiny coves north and south of the town, which are much more rewarding. Booths on the main beach sell tickets for boat trips (Easter–Oct) around the surrounding coastline, including to Sant Feliu.
CUINA CATALANA
Catalunya has a fantastic climate, a rich plurality of products and diverse geography – the sea, the mountains, and the plains. There are few parts of the world this fertile.	Ferran Adrià
That’s how the famous Catalan chef describes his home region’s geographical bounty, source of its rich cuina Catalana. Culled from “mar i muntanya” (sea and mountain), Catalunya’s cuisine matches fresh seafood on the coast with hearty meats (particularly sausages) inland, while fragrant fruits and vegetables provide ballast to every meal.
The seafood variety is impressive, and includes plump shrimp and langoustine; eel from the Ebro delta; trout from Pyrenean rivers; and the ever-present bacallà (cod). Sausages, most using pork as a base, include botifarra, fuet (a thin, dried sausage) and llonganissa (cured sausage). Catalunya has taken mushrooms to a high art, not least aromatic bolets (wild mushrooms), which are picked and prepared in autumn. In late winter and early spring, calçots (large, tender, sweet spring onions) are roasted over coals and dipped in romesco sauce, which is made with tomatoes, peppers, onions, almonds, garlic and olive oil.
Perhaps Catalunya’s best-loved export is pa amb tomàquet, bread rubbed with tomato and drizzled in olive oil, which is not only ubiquitous throughout the region, but in the rest of Spain. As for dessert: Catalunya’s answer to crème brûlée is the custard-style crema Catalana. And when it comes time to celebrate, do so with cava (see box, 773).
CATALAN CHEFS
Contemporary Catalan cuisine has become synonymous with Ferran Adrià, who transformed (and transfixed) the culinary world with his famous scented espumas (foams) and “molecular gastronomy” (or, as Ferran prefers to describe it, cocina de vanguardia). The effects have gone far beyond the dazzling laboratory of a kitchen in his former restaurant El Bulli on the Costa Brava. Ferran closed El Bulli in July 2011 to launch a nonprofit culinary foundation. Chefs across the region have been inspired by Ferran, each adding their own spin, including (in Barcelona) Carles Abellán, as well as Albert Adrià who, with older brother Ferran, opened the excellent tapas bar Tickets in 2011, followed by several other restaurants in the city, adding to the Adrià empire. Elsewhere in the region, you’ll find restaurants serving elevated Catalan cuisine, including at Compartir in Cadaques, helmed by three former El Bulli chefs; El Motel, considered the birthplace of modern Catalan cuisine; and the legendary Celler de Can Roca, voted best restaurant in the world in 2013 and 2015.
Far de Tossa and around
Pg. de la Vila Vella • Tues–Sun 10am–5pm, sometimes open longer hours in summer • €3
Towering over the Vila Vella is the nineteenth-century Far de Tossa, home to an innovative exhibition on Mediterranean lighthouses. Just below here, not far from the ruins of the town’s fifteenth-century Gothic church, stands a statue of Ava Gardner, who made the town famous in the 1950 film, Pandora and the Flying Dutchman.
Museu Municipal
Pl. Roig i Soler 1 • June–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–May Tues–Fri 10am–1.30pm & 3–5pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 4–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €3 • 972 340 709, tossademar.com/museu
Located in the old quarter, the Museu Municipal features a Roman mosaic and remnants, including ceramic vases, from a nearby excavated Roman villa, and a Chagall painting, Celestial Violinist. Chagall spent summers here for four decades, and evocatively called Tossa the “blue paradise”.
Arrival and information: Tossa de Mar
By bus The bus station is at Avda. del Pelegrí, behind the turisme. To reach the centre, and the beaches, head straight down the road opposite the bus station and turn right along Avda. Costa Brava. Tossa is an easy day-trip from Barcelona (up to 8 daily; 1hr 30min); Lloret (generally every 30min; 15min); and Girona (up to 2 daily; 1hr).
By boat Crucero boats stop right at the centre of the beach, with the ticket offices nearby. Boats travel to Sant Feliu (up to 5 daily; 45min), and Platja d’Aro/Sant Antoni de Calonge/Palamós (up to 5 daily; 1hr 15min/1hr 25min/1hr 45min).
Turisme Avda. del Pelegrí 25, in front of the bus station (April, May & Oct Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–8pm; June–Sept Mon–Sat 10am–8pm; Nov–March Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm; 972 340 108, infotossa.com).
Accommodation
There’s plenty of accommodation in the warren of tiny streets around Sant Vicenç church and below the old city walls. There are also a handful of local campsites, all within 2–4km of the centre.

Cala Llevadó 3km out of town, off the road to Lloret 972 340 314, calallevado.com. This is one of the better local campsites, with good facilities – swimming pool, bar-restaurant – plus plenty of outdoor activities, from windsurfing to mini-golf. They also have a range of other options, including bungalows (from €85) and cabins made with natural woods and insulated with the wool from local sheep (from €85). Closed Oct–April. €30
Hotel Cap d’Or Pg. del Mar 1 972 340 081, capdor.com. Relaxed, friendly, ivy-clad pensió on the seafront – in the home of the family who has managed it since 1954 – nestled beneath the walls of the old town. Rates include breakfast. Closed Nov–April. €85
Hotel Delfin Avda. Costa Brava 2 972 340 250, hotelesdante.com. Take in the sun from your balcony at this inviting hotel that has spacious, modern rooms with marble bathrooms. The beach is just a 5min saunter away, and the generous buffet breakfast is included in the rate. €85
Hotel Diana Pl. d’Espanya 6 972 341 886, hotelesdante.com. Handsome hotel in a modernista mansion on an attractive square, and with a bar on the seafront. Large rooms have sea or plaça (cheaper) views and tiled floors. Rates include breakfast. Closed Nov–Easter. €190
Pola 4km north off the corniche road to Sant Feliu 972 341 050, campingpola.es. This campsite sits in a pretty cove, has great facilities, from a pool to nearby tennis courts, and can organize outdoor activities, including kayaking and canoeing. Closed Oct–May. €38
Premier Gran Hotel Reymar Platja de Mar Menuda 972 340 312, ghreymar.com. Elegant beachfront hotel across the bay from the Vila Vella. Modern rooms come with marble-clad bathrooms and terraces overlooking the sea. The Reymar Spa offers soothing massages and aromatherapy treatments. Closed Nov–April. €230
Eating and drinking
Tossa offers a plethora of restaurants, from top-notch seafood spots to simple sangría-and-tapas joints. Pg. del Mar and the road behind it, C/Portal, are brimming with alfresco options. Come evening, C/Sant Josep gets lively with revellers hitting the bars.

Bahía Pg. del Mar 19 972 340 322, restaurantbahiatossa.com. A welcoming interior and breezy terrace are the comfortable setting for tasty seafood meals (menus from €16–18 weekdays). Summer daily 1–3.30pm & 7.30–10.30pm; winter lunch only.
Castell Vell Pl. Pintor Roig i Soler 972 341 030, castellvelltossa.es. Located in a tranquil corner of the old town, this spot serves tasty mid-priced fish, seafood and paella on a terrace shaded with vines. The hearty menú del día starts at €22. March–Oct Mon 8.30–10.30pm, Tues–Sun 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
La Cuina de Can Simon C/Portal 24 972 341 269. This venerable joint turns out classic regional dishes in an elegant dining room of linen-topped tables, stone walls and oil paintings. The menu features a mar i muntanya (sea and mountain) section, including suckling lamb and lobster suquet, a local stew that originated on the Costa Brava. Main courses range €16–29. April to mid-Oct Wed–Sat 1–4pm & 8–11pm, Sun 1–4pm.
La lluna C/Abat Oliba 10  972 342 523. Settle in to the outdoor garden patio at this small family-run tapas restaurant that’s tucked into a quiet alley in the old town. The menu is rustically traditional – meatballs in cider, patatas bravas, garlic shrimp – along with fresh sangría. Tapas €6–11. April–Oct Mon–Wed & Fri–Sun 1–3pm & 7–10.30pm.
Baix Empordà
Baix Empordà, which unfolds north of La Selva, reveals a local flavour – medieval villages, quiet coves, inland countryside that seems to stretch on forever – that’s sometimes overshadowed by the splashy tourist infrastructure on other parts of the coast. Platja d’Aro is a smarter version of Lloret – with a particularly lively summer nightlife, popular with weekenders from Barcelona – while the working fishing ports of Sant Feliu de Guíxols and Palamós remain largely (and thankfully) aloof from their boisterous neighbours. Farther north, the area around Palafrugell boasts some fabulous cove towns, while hilltop Begur stands over a string of lovely little coves. Inland lures include the medieval towns of Pals and Peratallada, atmospheric Iberian ruins at Ullastret and the pottery industry of La Bisbal.
Sant Feliu de Guíxols and around
Separated from Tossa by 22km and, reputedly, 365 curves of stunning corniche, SANT FELIU DE GUÍXOLS is a bustling town with a decent beach and a cluster of handsome modernista buildings, evidence of its prosperous nineteenth-century cork industry. Its origins go back to the tenth century, when a settlement grew up around a Benedictine monastery, whose ruins, including the arched Porta Ferrada, still stand in Pl. Monestir.
Sant Feliu’s old-world style is at its most apparent in the modernista Casa Patxot (built in 1917 and now home to the Chamber of Commerce) at Pg. del Mar 40, on the corner of Rambla Portalet, and the curious Moorish-style Nou Casino La Constància nearby at Pg. dels Guíxols 1–3, which was begun in 1851 and later adorned with modernista touches and brightly coloured swooping arches. The passeig follows the sweep of the coarse sand beach and yachting marina, while the streets back from the sea are great for a stroll past the shops and bars and the eighteenth-century Pl. del Mercat, with its bustling daily market.
Church of Sant Feliu es la Mare de Déu dels Àngels and Museu d’Història de la Ciutat
Pl. del Monestir • Museum: summer daily 11am–9pm; mid-Sept to summer Mon–Fri 10am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sat 11am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 11am–2pm • €6 • 972 821 575, museu.guixols.cat
The Church of Sant Feliu es la Mare de Déu dels Àngels has a Romanesque facade and beautifully crafted crucifix dating from the same period as the Benedictine monastery, though it was rebuilt in Gothic style in the fourteenth century. The church is open for services only, while the rest of the complex is part of the Museu d’Història de la Ciutat, which contains absorbing exhibitions on the history of the town, including local archeological finds, as well as temporary exhibits on everything from local painters to photographers.
S’Agaró
On a headland north of Sant Feliu is the curious village of S’AGARÓ, created in the 1920s, where every house was built in the modernista style by Rafael Masó, a student of Antoni Gaudí. The short Camí de Ronda leading to the fabulous Platja Sa Conca is the best way to explore and take in a swim.
Arrival and information: Sant Feliu de Guíxols
By bus Teisa bus services to and from Girona stop opposite the monastery, while the Sarfa bus station (for buses to and from Palafrugell, Girona and Barcelona) is a 5min walk north of the centre on the main Carretera de Girona, at the junction with C/Llibertat.
Destinations Barcelona (8 daily; 1hr 30min); Girona (July–Sept 11 daily; 2hr); Lloret de Mar (July & Aug 2–3 daily; 40min); Palafrugell (15 daily; 45min); Palamós (15 daily; 30min); Platja d’Aro (17 daily; 15min).
By boat Cruceros boats dock on the main beach, where you’ll also find the various ticket offices.
Turisme Pza. del Monestir (June–Sept daily 10am–2pm & 4–8pm; Oct–May Mon–Sat 10am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 820 051, guixols.cat).
accommodation and eating
Cau del Pescador C/Sant Domènec 11 972 324 052, caudelpescador.com. This atmospheric spot has a generous choice of seafood, from Sant Feliu anchovies to shrimp and squid, at mid-range prices. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm; Sept–June closed Mon dinner & Tues.
El Celler de Triton C/Sant Ramon 5 972 327 531, tritonsantfeliu.com. Eat well – but healthily – at this cosy café-restaurant where much of the menu is organic, from the grilled meats and fish to the beer. Plus, a top-notch array of vegetarian and vegan dishes includes grilled seasonal vegetables and rice, as well as gluten-free options. Mains €10–18. Mon & Wed–Sun 11am–midnight.
El Dorado Mar President Irla 15 972 326 286, grupoeldorado.com. Settle into this seaside spot, overlooking the harbour at the southern end of the beach. Feast on a menu of fresh seafood, from clams to cod. Menu starts at €20. Mon–Fri 1–4pm & 8–11pm, Sat & Sun 1–4.30pm & 8–11pm; closed Wed in winter.
Hostal de La Gavina Pujada de l’Hostal, S’Agaró 972 321 100, lagavina.com. Sitting in calm grounds overlooking Platja Sant Pol at the southern end of S’Agaró, this five-star hotel features palatial, marble-floored rooms adorned with elegant hand-carved furniture and fine antique rugs and lamps; the luxury continues with wood-panelled dining rooms, bars, terraces, a saltwater pool and spa. €410
Hotel Hostal del Sol Carretera de Palamós 192 972 320 193, hostaldelsol.cat. Take a breather from the beachside bustle at this colonial-style hotel, which rises up near S’Agaró, and has airy rooms that all face out, with lovely views. Plus, there are two pools, as well as a decent complimentary breakfast. €80
Van der Velk Hotel Barcarola C/Pablo Picasso 1–19 972 326 932, hotelbarcarola.es. Well-run, great-value hotel, just north of Sant Feliu, near S’Agaro and Sant Pol Beach. Kick back in comfortable rooms, some with ample terraces with sunbeds. Plus, there’s a swimming pool and free parking. €70
Platja d’Aro and around
A few kilometres to the north of S’Agaró, PLATJA D’ARO is a neon strip of bars and shops running parallel to, but hidden from, a long sandy beach. It’s by no means picturesque, but it does offer good nightlife, a great beach and some stylish shopping.
Beyond Platja d’Aro, the road leads to the more family-oriented but not terribly pretty town of Sant Antoni de Calonge; more enticing are the coves and beaches strung out between the two towns, all of which can be reached on foot by the serpentine and at times tricky Camí de Ronda or by a number of footpaths descending from the main road.
Arrival and INFORMATION: Platja d’Aro AND AROUND
By bus Regular Sarfa buses travel to Platja d’Aro from around the Costa Brava, including Girona (just under 2hr).
Turisme Cinto Verdaguer 4, on the junction with central Avda. S’Agaró (July & Aug 8am–9pm, rest of year daily 9am–1pm & 4–7pm; 972 817 179, platjadaro.com).
accommodation
Platja d’Aro is filled with an array of hotels, from small family-run spots to larger tourist-driven resort hotels.

Hotel Bell Repòs C/Nostra Senora del Carme 18 972 817 100, hotelbellrepos.com. This long-running hotel, with clean, basic rooms, is near the main beach. A hearty buffet breakfast is included. €95
Palamós and around
Immediately northeast of Sant Antoni de Calonge, Palamós was founded in 1277 and sacked by Barbarossa in 1543. The town’s pleasant old quarter, set apart from the new on a promontory at the eastern end of the bay, makes for a pleasant afternoon wander and an evening at one of the breezy outdoor restaurant terraces.
Accessible from Palamós by road or along the Camí de Ronda are two fabulous beaches. The first, the idyllic Cala S’Alguer, is framed by nineteenth-century fishermen’s huts, while the larger Platja de Castell was rescued from the clutches of property developers thanks to a local referendum. Perched on the headland at the northern tip of Platja de Castell are the tranquil ruins of an Iberian settlement.
Museu de la Pesca
Edifici del Tinglado, Port de Palamós • May–June & Sept–April Tues–Fri 10am–1.30pm & 3–7pm; July–Aug daily 10am–8pm • €5 • 972 600 424, museudelapesca.org
The working fishing port here is home to the interesting Museu de la Pesca, which chronicles the town’s fishing and maritime history via audiovisual exhibits and historic fishing equipment and other archeological finds. The museum also organizes a variety of activities, many targeted at kids, including sailing, seafood cooking classes and visits to local fish auctions.
Arrival and information: Palamós and around
By bus Regular Sarfa buses travel to Palamós from around the Costa Brava, including Girona (1hr 30min).
Turisme Pg. del Mar (summer daily 9am–9pm; winter Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 600 550, palamos.org).
Eating
The town features a variety of good traditional restaurants. For after-dark fun, the best places are between the old town and the port in the area called La Planassa (towards the end of the promontory).

Maria de Cadaqués C/Tauler i Servià 6 972 314 009, mariadecadaques.cat. This popular restaurant, just off the marina, has an impressive history: it was founded in 1936 as a fishermen’s tavern, and continues to serve excellent shellfish and calamares. Dishes €12–26. Daily 2–4pm & 8–11pm; closed Sun eve.
Palafrugell
A cluster of streets and shops around a sixteenth-century church and the bustling Pl. Nova, PALAFRUGELL, lies seven kilometres north of Palamós, and 4km inland from the breezy coastline. It’s at its liveliest during the morning produce market (Tues–Sun), which on Sunday expands to include clothing, toys and other items. In the summer (July to early Sept), Palafrugell hosts an evening handicrafts market (Thurs–Sat). For accommodation, go for one of the surrounding beach towns, including Llafranc and Tamariu, which have a wider choice of hotels.
Museu del Suro
Plaçeta del Museu del Suro • July–Aug Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8.30pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Sept–June Tues–Fri 10am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €3 • 972 307 825, museodelsuro.cat
Set in a handsome former modernista cork factory, this museum delves into one of Palafrugell’s most important historic industries – cork. Exhibits include factory machinery once used to manufacture cork and large-scale old photos that depict the history and evolution of cork-making in Palafrugell. The museum also exhibits a wide variety of changing art shows, including contemporary local artists and photographers.
Fundació Josep Pla
C/Nou 51 • Summer Mon–Fri 9am–1pm & 5–8.30pm, Sat 10am–1pm & 5–8.30pm, Sun 10am–1pm; winter Mon–Fri 9am–2pm & 4–6.30pm, Sat 10.30am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10.30am–2pm • €2.50 • 972 30 55 77, fundaciojoseppla.cat
While relatively unknown beyond Catalunya, within the region Pla is considered one of the greatest writers in the Catalan language. Born in Palafrugell in 1897, Pla’s literary output was tremendous. As the Paris Review eloquently summed up his long career, “If Barça is more than just a football club, then Pla – a political and cultural journalist, travel writer, biographer, memoirist, essayist, novelist, and foodie, whose collected works clock in at more than thirty-thousand pages and thirty-eight volumes – was more than just a writer.” The Fundació Josep Pla, which encompasses the house where Pla was born, features permanent and temporary exhibits that chronicle Pla’s life of letters, including photographs, books, clippings and more.
Arrival and information: Palafrugell
By bus Buses arrive at Palafrugell’s Sarfa bus terminal atC/Luís Companys 2, a 10min walk from the town centre. Palafrugell is also well connected by bus to other cities in the region, including to Barcelona (6–8 daily; 2hr); Figueres (5 daily; 1hr 30min); Girona (15 daily; 1hr); L’Escala (4 daily; 35min); Lloret de Mar (2 daily; 1hr 30min); Palamós (15 daily; 15min); Pals (4 daily; 10min); and Sant Feliu (15 daily; 45min).
Turisme C/Carrilet 2, near the terminal (May, June & Sept Mon–Sat 10am–1pm & 5–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm; July & Aug Mon–Sat 9am–9pm, Sun 10am–1pm; Oct–April Mon–Sat 10am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm; 972 300 228, visitpalafrugell.cat). There’s also a turisme in the centre at C/Sta. Margarida 1 (Easter–Oct Mon–Sat 10am–1pm & 5–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm; same phone number).
eating
Palafrugell features a range of eateries, from casual to elegant.

Mas Oliver Avda. d’Espanya (outside town on the ring road) 972 301 041. Tuck into praised Catalan cuisine, including excellent grilled fish and meats. In warm weather dine on the outdoor terrace. The menú del día is a good deal, starting at €12 (€24 on weekends). Mon & Wed–Sun 1.30–4pm & 8–11pm, Tues 8–11pm; closed usually Nov & Dec.
Pa i Raim C/Torres i Jonama 56 972 304 572, pairaim.com. Inviting, elegant restaurant featuring excellent Catalan cuisine with a twist, including monkfish with sautéed artichoke, and roast veal scented with vanilla. Mains €15–25. Tues–Sun 1.30–3pm & 8–10pm; closed Tues lunch in Aug and Sun in winter.
CHEERS TO CREMAT
Catalan sailors returning from Cuba and the Antilles in the nineteenth century brought back more than soulful havaneres songs. They also brought back Caribbean rum, which forms the basis for cremat, a typical drink of the fishing villages in this region, particularly Calella and neighbouring Llafranc.
The potent concoction contains rum, sugar, lemon peel, coffee grounds and sometimes a cinnamon stick. The ritual of drinking cremat is a big part of the experience: it’s brought out in an earthenware bowl and you have to set fire to it, occasionally stirring until (after a few minutes) it’s ready to drink. Also part of the ritual is to sing havaneres while drinking.
Calella hosts a Cantada de Havaneres in July, with groups performing havaneres (tickets start at €30). Check in with the turismes in Palafrugell (see above) or Calella.
Around Palafrugell
The area around Palafrugell boasts tranquil, pine-covered slopes, which back three of the most alluring villages on the Costa Brava – Calella, Llafranc and Tamariu – each with a distinct character and all with scintillatingly turquoise waters. With no true coastal road, the beach development here has been generally mild – low-rise, whitewashed apartments and hotels – and although a fair number of foreign visitors come in season, it’s also where many of the better-off Barcelonans have a villa for weekend and August escapes. All this makes for one of the most appealing (though hardly undiscovered) stretches of the Costa Brava.
Calella de Palafrugell
Captivating Calella de Palafrugell possesses a gloriously rocky coastline punctuated by several tiny sand and rocky beaches with a backdrop of whitewashed arches and fin-de-siècle villas. From the charming area around the minuscule main beaches, the town stretches southwards along a winding Camí de Ronda to the hidden El Golfet beach.
Jardí Botanic de Cap Roig
Daily: April–Sept 10am–8pm; Oct–March 10am–6pm • €6 • visitpalafrugell.cat
Above the El Golfet beach, the Cap Roig headland is home to the Jardí Botanic de Cap Roig, a clifftop botanical garden and castle begun in 1927 by an exiled colonel from the tsar’s army and his aristocrat English wife. This is also the site of the superb music event Festival Jardins de Cap Roig (mid-July to late Aug; caproigfestival.com), which features everything from jazz to rock, and has in the past hosted such big names as Bob Dylan, Diana Ross and Elvis Costello.
Llafranc
A gentle, hilly twenty-minute walk from Calella de Palafrugell, high above the rocks along the Camí de Ronda, brings you to Llafranc, tucked into the next bay from Calella de Palafrugell, and with a good (if packed) stretch of beach and a glittering marina. A little more upmarket than Calella, it’s a self-consciously opulent place with expensive beachside restaurants and hillside villas glinting in the sun. Steps lead up from the port for the winding climb through residential streets to the Far de Sant Sebastià, a lighthouse where you’ll be rewarded with some terrific views.
Tamariu, Platja d’Aiguablava and Fornells
Tamariu, 4km north of Llafranc, is quieter and a great favourite with well-heeled Catalan families. The town’s action is focused on the small seafront, and the promenade – lined with tamarind trees, the source of the town’s name – has a hushed but inviting atmosphere, with small shops, pavement restaurants and neighbours sitting on their front porches. Geared more towards the summer-home crowd, the town has fewer hotels than other towns on the coast, but most are good.
It’s a pleasant drive along the coast from here to Begur, passing Platja d’Aiguablava. Just 1km north of Aiguablava is the tiny and exclusive cove of Fornells, home to the lovely Hotel Aiguablava.
arrival and information: around palafrugell
By bus From June to Sept, buses run regularly from Palafrugell to Calella and then on to Llafranc (July & Aug every 30min; June & Sept roughly hourly), reducing to around four times daily from October to May. A less frequent service runs to the more distant beach at Tamariu (June–Sept; 3–4 daily).
Turisme C/les Voltes 6, Calella de Palafrugell (July & Aug daily 10am–8pm; Easter–June & Sept to mid-Oct Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm; 972 614 475, visitpalafrugell.cat).

Eating
CALELLA DE PALAFRUGELL
Tragamar Platja de Canadell 972 614 336, tragamar.com. Stylish seaside restaurant focuses on fresh seafood, from monkfish to grilled lobster. Mains €15–25. Mid-June to mid-Sept daily 1–4.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm; rest of year closed Tues.
LLAFRANC
Casamar Hotel Casamar C/Nero 3 972 300 104, hotelcasamar.net. If you’re going to splurge on your Costa Brava vacation, this is a place to do so. This classic restaurant, helmed by progressive chef Quim Casellas, overlooks the sea and features a seasonal menu of creative cuisine, including dishes like sautéed artichoke with quail’s egg and filet of sole perfumed with passion fruit. Main courses €16–30. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm; usually closed Jan–March.
Begur and around
In the lee of a ruined hilltop castle, chic BEGUR, about 7km from Palafrugell and slightly inland, stands at the centre of a web of winding roads twisting down to its tranquil and equally stylish beaches. Narrow streets lead to the simple exterior and surprisingly ornate Gothic interior of the Església Parroquial de Sant Pere; most remarkable is the odd contrast between statuary and architecture, especially the simplicity of the alabaster Madonna and Child compared with the busy altarpiece. Watching over it all, the thrice-destroyed Castell de Begur offers fabulous perspectives of the rocky coves to the south and the curving swathe of the Golf de Roses to the north. The annual Festival de Música de Begur, generally from late July to late August, features everything from classical music to swing and jazz.
From here roads lead east to the Cap de Begur, with its spectacular mirador, the coves of Sa Tuna and Aiguafreda, linked by a scenic footpath (1km), and the pretty hamlet of SA RIERA, where you can walk to Platja del Raco and Platja Illa Roja, some of the best beaches on the coast.
Arrival AND information: Begur and around
By bus Sarfa buses travel to Begur from around the Costa Brava, including nearby Palafrugell (10min), and once a day from Girona (1hr 15min). The beaches are connected to the town by summer minibus services.
Turisme Avgda. Onze de Setembre 5, just south of Begur’s main square, Pl. de la Villa (daily: spring and autumn 9am–2pm & 4–7pm; summer 9am–2pm & 4–9pm; winter 9am–2pm; 972 624 520, visitbegur.cat).

Pals
Turisme: Pl. Major 7, in the old town (daily: June–Aug 10am–2pm & 5–8pm; rest of year 10am–2pm & 4–7pm; 972 637 380, palsturisme.com).
The 7km journey north from Palafrugell to Torroella de Montgrí can be broken at PALS, also 7km from Begur. This fortified medieval village was long neglected until it was painstakingly restored by a local doctor after the Civil War, which has resulted in the rather unfortunate side effect of being invaded by scores of day-trippers. Even so, its fourteenth-century streets and hilltop setting make it an enjoyable place for a stroll. The golden-brown buildings cluster around a stark tower, all that remains of the town’s Romanesque castle; below is the beautifully vaulted Gothic Església de Sant Pere and Romanesque Torre de les Hores.
La Bisbal
Castell Palau de la Bisbal
Tues–Sat 11am–2pm & 5–8pm, Sun 11am–2pm • €2, guided tour €3
La Bisbal’s most important historical building is the fortified Castell Palau, built for the bishops of Girona. The sturdy castle, which dates back to the eleventh and twelfth centuries, has been in continuous use since it was built, including a spell as a prison during the Spanish Civil War. Inside, you’ll learn about medieval Catalunya while touring its various sections.
accommodation and eating: La Bisbal
Arcs de Monells C/Vilanova 1, Monells 972 630 304, hotelarcsmonells.com. This lovely hotel, set in a fourteenth-century hospital 3km northwest of town, is an elegant base for exploring the area. It has a beautifully renovated interior and comfortable rooms. €185
Hotel Castell d’Empordà 972 646 254, castelldemporda.com. This 800-year-old castle, perched on top of a hill 3km north of the town with beautiful views of the surrounding countryside, is now a sumptuous hotel. You’re in good company: a captain for Christopher Columbus stayed here, and Dalí once tried to buy it. The restaurant celebrates the local bounty, and serves creative Catalan cuisine and excellent regional wines. Mains €14–28. Daily 1–2pm & 8–11pm. €175
Peratallada and Ullastret
Five kilometres northeast of La Bisbal is the medieval walled town of PERATALLADA, which has preserved a rustic feel, with the help of its tiny cobbled streets, stone arches and shaded squares. An influx of small hotels and restaurants has proved to be surprisingly in keeping with their thirteenth-century Romanesque setting, making it a fabulous base away from the beach. The focal point is the Castell de Peratallada (closed to visitors), whose origins have been dated to pre-Roman times.
Museu d’Arqueologia de Ullastret
Puig de Sant Andreu d’Ullastret • Summer Tues–Sun 10am–8pm; winter 10am–6pm • €4
Six kilometres northeast lie the remains of the Iberian settlement of Puig de Sant Andreu d’Ullastret, a lovely, peaceful ruin with an archeological museum that has excavated artefacts from the area. The site is just north of the friendly, historic village of Ullastret, signposted off the main road.
Information: peratallada and ullastret
Turisme The turisme is on Pl. del Castell, in front of the Castell de Peratallada (summer daily noon–2pm & 3–8pm; winter generally Sat & Sun only; 872 987 030, visitlabisbal.cat).
accommodation
Hostal Restaurant La Riera Pl. les Voltes 3, Peratallada 972 634 142, lariera.es. Cosy hostal, comfortably housed in a seventeenth-century building – and one of the area’s more economical options. Rate includes breakfast. The restaurant serves good Catalan cuisine. €80
Torroella de Montgrí
TORROELLA DE MONTGRÍ, 8km from Ullastret and 9km beyond Pals, was once an important medieval port, but today has been left high and dry by the receding Mediterranean. It now stands 5km inland, beneath the shell of the huge, crenellated Castell de Montgrí (at 302m, a stiff 30min walk away), built by King Jaime II between 1294 and 1301 but never completed. The town itself remains distinctly medieval in appearance with its narrow streets, fine mansions and fourteenth-century parish church of Sant Genís (daily 4–6pm; sometimes open in mornings as well). The Festival Internacional de Música (en.festivaldetorroella.com), held each July and August in the main square and church, features an excellent line-up of classical music.
Arrival and information: Torroella de Montgrí
By bus Regular buses travel between Torroella and Barcelona (just under 2hr), as well as to L’Estartit (15min).
Turisme Centre Cultural, C/d’Ullà (July & Aug daily 10am–2pm & 6–9pm; Sept–June Mon & Wed–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 755 180, visitestartit.com/en).
accommodation
Palau Lo Mirador Pl. de l’Església 1 972 758 063, palaulomirador.com. This handsome, historic hotel features a palatial interior, with spacious rooms and well-appointed bathrooms. €120
L’Estartit and the Illes Medes
The nearest beach to Torroella is 6km to the east at L’ESTARTIT, an otherwise unexceptional resort town. Call into the turisme for information about the nearby Illes Medes, Catalunya’s only offshore islands – kiosks in the area sell boat trips in the summer. The tiny islands form a protected nature reserve, hosting the most important colony of herring gulls in the Mediterranean, numbering some eight thousand pairs, and offer some of the best diving and snorkelling on the coast.
Arrival and information: L’Estartit and the illes medes
By bus Hourly buses travel here from Torroella de Montgrí (15min).
Turisme At the northern end of Pg. Marítim, which runs along the seafront (summer daily 9.30am–2pm; rest of year Mon–Fri 9am–1pm & 3–6pm, Sat & Sun 10am–2pm; 972 751 910, visitestartit.com).
Eating
Restaurant Bravo Pg. Marítim 82–86 972 752 116. You’ll find plenty of bars and restaurants along the seafront, like this restaurant, which serves mid-priced fresh seafood, including fresh mussels and grilled fish, and aromatic rice dishes on a breezy terrace. Summer daily 1–4pm & 8–10pm; sometimes limited hours in winter.
Alt Empordà
Beyond Torroella de Montgrí, the scenery changes quite abruptly as you move into the fertile plains and wetlands of the southern part of the Alt Empordà, dominated by the broad swathe of the Golf de Roses. Coves give way to long stretches of sand as far north as Roses, which nestles in its own closed-in bay. The gulf is backed for the most part by flat, rural land, well watered by the Muga and Fluvià rivers. Having been left to its own quiet devices for centuries, this section of coast is distinct from the otherwise touristy Costa Brava, and has really only suffered the attentions of the developers in towns at either end of the bay, most notably in the few kilometres between Roses and the giant marina resort of Empuriabrava.
At the southern end of the gulf is the pleasant old fishing port of L’Escala, made more remarkable by the presence of Empúries, a ruined Greek and Roman settlement and one of Spain’s most important archeological sites. Beyond Roses, the familiar crashing rocks and deeply indented coves return with a vengeance in the wild Cap de Creus headland. The jewel in the crown here is Cadaqués, eternally linked to Salvador Dalí, who lived for years in the neighbouring fishermen’s village of Portlligat, now home to an absorbing museum in his bizarre former residence. For the final run to the French border, the road swoops along the coast through quieter villages such as whitewashed El Port de la Selva.
THE ART OF ANCHOVIES
There are anchovies, and then there are Catalan anchovies. Most think of anchovies as oily, limp little items, but here on the Catalan coast, and most famously in L’Escala, anchoas (anxoves in Catalan) are succulent, pale in colour and plump – almost double the size of what you may be used to. L’Escala is widely known for its canning factories where Catalunya’s best anchovies are packaged.
You can sample them in most bars and restaurants – and there may be nothing better than a plate of anchovies, a hunk of bread (the better to soak up the aromatic olive-oil-laced juices) and a cerveza or three, enjoyed at a seaside terraza. And bring the taste home with you: plenty of grocery shops around town sell little jars and cans that you can pack into your bags.
L’Escala
At the southernmost end of the sweeping billhook of the Golf de Roses, L’ESCALA is split between its shabby but picturesque nucli antic, or old town, favoured by local holiday-makers, and the more commercial Riells quarter, which has a beach and is the haunt of foreign visitors. Infinitely more appealing, the narrow pedestrianized streets of the old town huddle around the ancient port, where you’ll find medieval mooring posts and a cannonball, fired from a ship in May 1809, embedded in the wall of the house at C/Joan Massanet 2 (close to the seafront at the end of C/Pintor de Massanet).
A further enticement is L’Escala’s proximity to the ancient site of Empúries, which lies just a couple of kilometres out of town.
Arrival and information: L’Escala
By bus Buses stop on Avda. Girona, just down the road from the turisme. Regular services travel to and from Barcelona (3 daily; 2hr 40min); Figueres (4–5 daily; 45min); Girona (2 daily; 1hr); Palafrugell (4 daily; 45min); and Pals (4 daily; 35min).
Turisme Pl. de las Escoles 1, on the edge of the old town (mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 9am–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm; mid-Sept to mid-June Mon–Fri 9am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sat 10am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm; 972 770 603, lescala.cat).
accommodation and eating
Freshly caught fish and seafood, particularly anchovies, are the speciality of the town’s restaurants, with a good choice in the port and the old town. For a drink, head to the nucli antic, where you’ll find a range from fishermen’s taverns and bars.

Hostal Spa Empúries Platja de Portitxol s/n 972 770 207, hostalempuries.com. This lovingly run hotel places a premium on sustainability – using biodegradable products and sourcing all its electricity from renewable resources. It also has an excellent location, near the beach and the main entrance to Empúries. Many of the sleek rooms have terraces overlooking the sea. The attached Villa Teresita restaurant serves tasty local organic cuisine. €186
Restaurant l’Avi Freu Paseo Lluis Albert 7 972 771 241. This established restaurant serves a daily menu focusing on rice dishes, starting at €16, as well as fresh seafood and other regional dishes. Daily 1–4pm & 7.30–10.30pm; weekends only in winter.
Villa Teresita Hostal Empúries 972 770 207, hostalempuries.com. This light-filled restaurant follows Hostal Empúries’ eco-friendly philosophy, serving what they call “eco-Mediterranean” cuisine. Feast on crayfish and prawns sourced from Palamós and Roses, grilled squid, and cod with pig’s ears and beans. Dishes €14–28. Daily 1–3.30pm & 8–10.30pm.
Empúries
Daily: Easter & June–Sept 10am–8pm; Oct to mid-Nov & mid-Feb to May 10am–6pm; mid-Nov to mid-Feb 10am–5pm • €5.50 • 972 770 208, mac.cat/eng/Branches/Empuries • You can enter the site via the beach in summer, but at other times the main entrance and car park lie on the road farther inland
The archeological site of Empúries, which lies behind a sandy bay about 2km north of L’Escala, has immense historical significance, being the first entry point of classical Mediterranean culture into Iberian Spain – its fascination derives from its distinct Greek and Roman quarters showing how one culture steadily usurped the other. You can see the ruins in a leisurely afternoon, spending the rest of your time on the pleasant duned stretch of sand nearby.
Empúries was the ancient Greek Emporion (literally “trading station”), founded in the early sixth century BC by merchants who, for three centuries, conducted a vigorous trade throughout the Mediterranean. In 218 BC, their settlement was taken by Scipio, and a Roman city – more splendid than the Greek, with an amphitheatre, fine villas and a broad marketplace – grew up above the old Greek town. The Romans were replaced in turn by the Visigoths, who built several basilicas, and Emporion disappears from the records only in the ninth century when, it is assumed, it was wrecked by either Saracen or Norman pirates.
OLIVE OIL TOURS AND TASTINGS
Empordà has made a name for itself with its excellent wines. And now the region’s olive oils are sharing the spotlight. For a tasting and tour, head to Oli de Ventalló (C/de la Bassa 20; 972 793 076, oliventallo), in the small stone town of Ventalló (9km west of L’Escala), where olive oil groves unfold in all directions. This family-run olive oil producer offers an array of tours, including a sunrise and sunset tour (from €25), where you’ll stroll the olive groves, visit the mill and sample olive oils – Empordà’s soil is rich in slate, which lends a tartness to the oil. The tour also includes a feast of local fare, like pa amb tomàquet with nutty cheese. Call ahead to book – tours generally run on Tuesdays and Thursdays in July and August; for the rest of the year, it’s by appointment.
The Greek colony
The remains of the original Greek colony, destroyed by a Frankish raid in the third century AD – at which stage all inhabitants moved to the Roman city – occupy the lower part of the site. Among the ruins of several temples, to the south on raised ground is one dedicated to Asklepios, the Greek healing god whose cult was centred on Epidauros and the island of Kos. The temple is marked by a replica of a fine third-century-BC statue of the god, the original of which (along with many finds from the site) is in the Museu Arqueològic in Barcelona. Nearby are several large water filters: Emporion had no aqueduct so water was stored here to be filtered and purified and then supplied to the town by means of long pipes, one of which has been reconstructed. Remains of the town gate, the agora (or central marketplace) and several streets can easily be made out, along with a mass of house foundations, some with mosaics, and the ruins of Visigoth basilicas. A small museum stands above, with helpful models and diagrams of the excavations, as well as a variety of archeological finds, and a digital and audiovisual display giving a brief history of the settlement.
The Roman town
Beyond the museum stretches the vast but only partially excavated Roman town. Here, two luxurious villas have been uncovered, and you can see their entrance halls, porticoed gardens and magnificent mosaic floors. Farther on are the remains of the forum, amphitheatre and outer walls.
Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’Empordà
Daily • Free
Halfway around the Golf de Roses, in two parcels of land on either side of the resort of Empuriabrava, is one of Spain’s more accessible nature reserves. The Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’Empordà is an important wetland reserve, created by the Catalan government in 1983 to save what remained of the Empordà marshland, which once covered the entire plain here but gradually reduced over the centuries as a result of agricultural developments and cattle raising. The park attracts a wonderful selection of birds to both its coastal terrain and the paddy fields typical of the area.
The park
There are two main paths around the lagoons and marshes: the first takes around two hours, while a second five-hour trek crosses more open land and can be cycled. Hides have been created along the way; morning and early evening are the best times for birdwatching and you’ll spy the largest number of species during the migration periods (March–May & Aug–Oct). You’ll almost certainly see marsh harriers and various waterfowl, and might spot bee-eaters and the rare glossy ibis.
Sant Pere Pescador
The nearest village to the visitors’ centre at El Cortalet is Sant Pere Pescador, 6km south, pleasant enough but surrounded by a glut of sprawling, extremely busy campsites. You can rent bikes here, handy given the flat countryside, but the hordes of tourists make Castelló d’Empúries, 8km farther on, a more attractive base.
arrival and information: Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’Empordà
By bus Sarfa buses travel daily to Sant Pere Pescador from Castelló d’Empúries, L’Escala and Figueres.
Visitor centre El Cortalet (daily: April–Sept 9.30am–2pm & 4.30–7pm; Oct–March 9.30am–2pm & 3.30–6pm; 972 454 222, parcsdecatalunya.net). Here you can pick up a brochure marking the recommended routes in the park.
accommodation
Nautic Almatà In the Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’Empordà 972 454 477, almata.com. This massive campsite is one of the best for access to the park. It has well-maintained facilities, including two pools and bike rental, and can organize outdoor excursions. Also available are a range of accommodation, including bungalows (€189) and apartments for four (€215) or five (€245). Closed Oct to mid-May. €52
Castelló d’Empúries
Formerly the capital of the counts of Empúries, the delightful small town of CASTELLÓ D’EMPÚRIES, halfway between the beach at Roses and Figueres, is also midway between the two halves of the Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls. A five-minute walk from where the bus halts takes you into a small medieval conglomeration that’s lost little of its genteel charm. The town’s narrow alleys and streets conceal some fine preserved buildings, a medieval bridge and a handsome church.
Church of Santa María
Church and museum: daily 10am–2pm & 4–8pm • Museum €1.50
The towering thirteenth-century church, Santa María, has an ornate doorway and alabaster altarpiece which alone are reward enough for the trip. Known as the Catedral of the Empordà, the church was intended to be the centre of an episcopal city, but opposition from the bishopric of Girona meant that this was never to be, thus leaving Castelló with a church out of proportion to the town.
arrival and information: Castelló d’Empúries
By bus Daily Sarfa buses service Castelló d’Empúries from Figueres (15min), Cadaqués (1hr) and Barcelona (1hr 30min). It’s a 10min walk from the bus stop into town.
Turisme Pl. Jaume I (summer daily 9am–9pm; rest of year Mon–Sat 9am–2pm & 4–6pm, Sun 10am–1pm; 972 156 233, castelloempuriabrava.com).
accommodation and eating
Hotel Canet Pl. Joc de la Pilota 2 972 250 340, hotelcanet.com. Relax at this lovely, historic hotel with views out over the tawny roofs of the village; there's also a restaurant that serves Catalan cuisine, including seafood, grilled meats and local produce. Mains €15–20. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm. €105
Hotel de la Moneda Pl. de la Moneda 8–10 972 158 602, hoteldelamoneda.com. Well-run hotel set in an eighteenth-century home, with comfortable, brightly painted rooms. €120
SIP YOUR WAY THROUGH EMPORDÀ
The vineyards in the Empordà wine region (doemporda.cat) aren’t just old. They’re ancient. This lush wine region, which unfolds inland from the Costa Brava, has been producing wine since the fifth century, when the Phoenicians first settled in the area. While primarily known for its naturally sweet Garnatxa, the region is going through a renaissance, with new, progressive small-batch winemakers developing a wide variety of blends. Over fifty wineries populate the Empordà, which is flanked by the Pyrenees on one side and the Mediterranean on the other, extending from Figueres north to the French border, and south through Baix Emporda. Rich soils and a mild Mediterranean climate ensure a flourishing harvest, but there’s also something else that’s unique to the region: the strong Tramuntana winds, which help protect the vines from disease and frost. Turisme Costa Brava Girona has launched a DO (Denominació d’Origen) Empordà Wine Route (costabrava.org/what-to-do/wine-and-gastronomy/wine-route), which features a range of recommended wineries, hotels and restaurants. Top picks in the region include Perelada (perelada.com), Celler Martin Faixó (cellermartinfaixo.com) and Vinyes Olivardots (olivardots.com).
Roses
ROSES, 9km from Castello, enjoys a lovely situation beneath medieval fortress walls at the head of the grand, sweeping bay. It’s a site that’s been inhabited for over three thousand years – the Greeks called the place Rhoda when they set up a trading colony around the excellent natural harbour in the ninth century BC – but apart from the ruined Castell de la Trinitat and the Citadel, which contains the absorbing Museu de la Ciutadella, there’s little in present-day Roses to hint at its long history. Instead, Roses is a full-blown package resort that trades exclusively on its 4km of sandy beach, which has fostered a large and popular watersports industry. If you’re staying, don’t skip a day-trip to Cadaqués, which you can reach via a short bus ride over the hill.
Citadel and the Museu de la Ciutadella
July–Aug daily 10am–9pm; June & Sept daily 10am–8pm; Oct–May Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • €4
You can walk around the Citadel, which contains the remains of the Greek settlement of Rhoda, an ancient Roman villa and the Museu de la Ciutadella, which explores the Citadel’s history – and its role in the evolution of Roses – via exhibits and photographs.
THE EVOLUTION OF EL BULLI – AND FERRAN ADRIÀ
In 2011, the most famous chef in the world closed his restaurant at the height of its popularity. Why? The answer to that explains who Catalan chef Ferran Adrià is.
Adrià’s legendary “molecular gastronomy” restaurant El Bulli, near the town of Roses, was voted best restaurant in the world numerous times by Restaurant magazine. At its apex, there were two million reservation requests per year – and eight thousand granted. The land on which it sat was originally purchased by a German couple, who opened a restaurant, which they named after their pet French bulldogs – El Bulli. Adrià joined the staff in 1984, guiding it to culinary heights until its closing.
Adrià is perhaps best known for his “foams” (espumas), scented with everything from carrot to pine nuts to smoke. One of his culinary signatures has been to re-create traditional Mediterranean flavours via very non-traditional methods, his wizardry yielding such concoctions as liquid ravioli; spherified olives; parmesan ice cream; and “caviaroli” – caviar made with allioli. As Adrià has said of his cuisine: “Nothing is as it seems.” Adrià is also famous for his deconstruction of Spain’s comfort dishes, like tortilla de patatas. Hot potato is transformed into foam, onion made into a thick purée and egg white becomes a whipped sabayon. It’s served in a tiny sherry glass with a spoon: the flavours fill the mouth – intense, warm and startlingly familiar.
Adrià closed El Bulli in July 2011, and in its place has set up a culinary foundation and centre, the ever-evolving El Bulli Foundation, which occupies the same space as did the restaurant, perched over the quiet cove of Montjoi at the end of a long and winding road above Roses. The foundation includes elBulli 1846, a culinary lab and exhibition space. But this is just the tip of his multi-project empire: Adrià launched Bullipedia (a type of culinary Wikipedia), taught a class at Harvard and has been featured in the documentary film Eating Knowledge. For the latest information, check the website: elbullifoundation.org.
You can still sample Adrià cuisine at brother Albert Adrià’s cluster of restaurants in the El Paral.lel neighbourhood in Barcelona, including the lively tapas bar Tickets and Enigma, which opened in 2017 and is said to be the restaurant most similar to El Bulli.
Adrià is sometimes compared to another famous native son of Catalunya: Salvador Dalí. One is a surrealist on canvas, the other a surrealist in the kitchen. Adrià, in eloquent fashion, summed up the relationship between art and cuisine like this:
The dialogue between art and cuisine is still young. But in the end, it’s not that important if cuisine is art, but if it changes the way you look at the world.
Arrival and information: Roses
By bus The bus station is on the corner of C/Gran Vía Pau Casals and Rambla Ginjolers. Sarfa buses travel regularly to and from Barcelona (2hr 15min) and Figueres (30min).
Turisme On the seafront promenade near the citadel (mid-June to mid-Sept 9am–9pm; rest of year Mon–Fri 9am–6pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 3–6pm, Sun 10am–1pm; 972 257 331, roses.cat).

Cadaqués
The Costa Brava is hardly undiscovered, but if there’s one place that still holds the hidden, quirky allure of the coast’s early days, it’s CADAQUÉS. This is thanks, in part, to its accessibility (or inaccessibility, as the case is): this northern Costa Brava town is reached only by the winding road over the hills from either Roses (16km) or Port de la Selva (12km), which gives it an air of isolation. With whitewashed and bougainvillea-festooned houses lining narrow, hilly streets, a tree-lined promenade and craggy headlands on either side of a working fishing port, it’s genuinely picturesque. Already by the 1920s and 1930s the place had begun to attract the likes of Picasso, Man Ray, Lorca, Buñuel, Thomas Mann and Einstein, but Cadaqués really “arrived” as an artistic-literary colony after World War II when Surrealist painter Salvador Dalí and his wife Gala settled at nearby Portlligat, attracting for some years a floating bohemian community. Today, a seafront statue of Dalí provides the town’s physical and spiritual focal point, haughtily gazing on the artists, well-heeled Barcelonans and art-seeking foreigners who have rolled up in his wake.
With its art galleries and studios, smart restaurants and trendy clothes shops, Cadaqués makes for an interesting stroll. At the top of the hill is the austere-looking sixteenth-century Església de Santa María, containing an ornate eighteenth-century altarpiece and a side chapel on the left painted by Dalí. Local beaches are all tiny and pebbly, but there are some enjoyable walks around the harbour and nearby coves; the helpful turisme has further information and maps.
Museu de Cadaqués
C/Narcis Monturiol 15 • Hours vary, but generally April–June & Oct Mon–Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 4–7pm; July–Sept daily 10am–8pm • €4 • 972 258 877
The Museu de Cadaqués features temporary exhibitions by local artists and intriguing displays relating to aspects of Dalí’s work. They also occasionally showcase exhibits on other artists connected to Cadaqués, including Picasso.
Arrival and information: Cadaqués
By bus Sarfa buses arrive at the little bus office on C/Sant Vicenç, on the edge of town, next to a large pay car park. From here, you can walk along C/Unió and C/Vigilant to the seafront or climb up through the old streets to reach it. Buses run to Barcelona (2 daily; 2hr 20min); Castelló d’Empúries (4 daily; 1hr); Figueres (3 daily; 1hr 5min); and Roses (4 daily; 30min).
Turisme C/des Cotxe 2, just back from Pl. Frederic Rahola on the promenade (late June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 9am–9pm, Sun 10am–1pm & 5–8pm; mid-Sept to late June Mon–Sat 9am–1pm & 3–7pm; 972 258 315, visitcadaques.org).
Accommodation
Cadaqués can get very busy in the peak season, and it’s a good idea to book in advance. Note that many hotels close in low season, from November to February, so call ahead if you’re visiting in winter.

Hostal La Residència C/Caritat Serinyana 1 972 258 312, laresidencia.net. Handsome building, built in 1904 (the year that Dalí was born) and loaded with character, though the rooms are relatively ordinary – the suites are elaborately decorated with Dalí in mind, however, and the balconies have stunning views. €105
Hostal Vehí C/Església 6 972 258 470, hostalvehi.com. Friendly and family-owned, this excellent-value pensió has a lovely central location near the church and well-tended rooms, and is consequently very popular. Closed Nov–Feb. €80
Hotel Blaumar C/Massa d’Or 21 972 159 020, hotelblaumar.com. If you’ve come to Cadaqués for some quiet afternoons of sprawling poolside, Blaumar delivers. It’s about a 10min walk from the centre of town, but that gives it an intimate, tucked-away feel. Rooms are simple but well kept, most with terraces, and the staff is helpful and accommodating. Closed Nov to mid-March. €119
Hotel Calina On Portlligat, Avda. Salvador Dalí 33 972 258 851, hotelcalina.com. Near Portlligat Beach, about a 20min walk from town, this well-maintained hotel offers tidy rooms with terraces as well as self-catering apartments, with full kitchens, that are ideal for families. Plus, you can splash in two swimming pools that are surrounded by gardens. Doubles €115, apartments €185
Hotel Horta d’en Rahola C/Sa Tarongeta 972 251 049, hortacadaques.com. This eighteenth-century family home has been charmingly transformed into a boutique hotel, with a lovely garden, and seven breezy rooms with local art on the walls and views over the old town. €130
Llané Petit C/Dr Bartomeus 37 972 251 020, llanepetit.com. Friendly, relaxing hotel at the southern end of the town. Most rooms have terraces with sea views, and there is a well-maintained pool. Closed Jan–Feb. €134
Playa Sol Platja Pianc 3 972 258 100, playasol.com. Set in a curve of the seafront, this quiet, charming hotel offers simply furnished but comfortable rooms affording superb views of the town or over tranquil gardens. Closed Dec. €157
Tramuntana Hotel C/de la Torre 9 972 259 270, hotel-tramuntana-cadaques.com. This light-filled boutique hotel offers a lovely mix of design, comfort and easy access to the sea, which is a short walk away. The eleven rooms, splashed with cool whites, tans and greys, each have a balcony with waterfront views. €128
Eating and drinking
Moderately priced seafood restaurants, any of which are worth trying, are strung along the seafront, while dotted about the old town and along C/Miquel Rosset are places to suit a wide range of tastes and budgets. Nightlife is a pleasurable blend of laidback idling at the beachside terraces and stylish hobnobbing around the bars and restaurants on C/Miguel Rosset.

Es Balconet C/Sant Antoni 2 972 258 814, restaurantesbalconet.com. Trek up a small winding street from the seafront to this cosy nook, where seafood reigns supreme. Go for the generous fixed menus, like monkfish with scallops, which includes a starter of superb tuna carpaccio and dessert (from €24). Daily 1–3pm & 7.30–10pm.
El Barroco C/Nou 10 972 258 632, elbarroco.net. This long-running restaurant represents all that’s unique about Cadaqués: Surrealist-tinged artwork lines the walls, while the sunny courtyard spills over with flowers and crawling vines. The menu is equally creative, with a focus on Lebanese cuisine, like meze platters of hummus and grape leaves, as well as paellas. Dalí used to dine here with Gala, and the owner is happy to share anecdotes of the restaurant’s formidable history. Dishes €11–26. Daily 2–4pm & 8–11pm; limited hours in winter.
Casa Anita C/Miquel Rosset 16 972 258 471. Cadaqués marches to the beat of its own drum, and this quirky institution is a good example. Seating is at communal tables and there are generally no menus – just the family staff rattling off the day’s specials of superb Catalan cuisine. Mains €15–25. Best to reserve ahead. Tues–Sun 1.30–4pm & 8.30–10pm; closed Nov.
Casa Nun Pl. de Portitxó 6 972 258 856. This lovely restaurant offers top-notch regional fish and meat dishes, which you can enjoy on the small, sunny terrace perched above the Pl. des Portitxó. Dishes €14–25. Easter–Oct daily 1.30–4pm & 8–11pm; Nov–Easter Fri & Sat lunch & dinner, plus Sun lunch.
Compartir Riera Sant Vicenç 972 258 482, compartircadaques.com. Founded by three former El Bulli chefs, this award-winning restaurant features multi-course meals that are designed for diners to share (“compartir”). Inventive dishes include ribs of rabbit with an apple allioli. The setting matches the cuisine: the spacious restaurant is awash in the colours of Cadaqués – white and blue – as well as a sun-dappled terrace. Dishes €17–30. Tues–Sun 1–3.45pm & 8–10.45pm; closed Jan to mid-Feb.
La Sirena C/Es Call 972 258 974. Tucked away in the old town, this appropriately named restaurant – “sirena” means “mermaid” – serves some of the best seafood in town. Menu starts around €15. Daily 1.30–4pm & 8–11pm; limited hours in winter.
Casa-Museu Salvador Dalí
Mid-June to mid-Sept daily 9.30am–9pm; rest of year Tues–Sun 10.30am–6pm; closed early Jan to mid-Feb; last entry 50min before closing • Tour €11; visits must be booked in advance by phone or via the website • 972 251 015, dali-estate.org
A well-signposted twenty-minute walk north of Cadaqués and 3km by road is the tiny harbour of PORTLLIGAT, former home of Salvador Dalí. The artist had spent much of his childhood and youth in Cadaqués, and later, with his wife and muse, Gala, he converted a series of waterside fishermen’s cottages in Portlligat into a sumptuous home that has all the quirks you would expect of the couple, such as speckled rooftop eggs and a giant fish painted on the ground outside. The house is now open to the public as the Casa-Museu Salvador Dalí, and although there’s not much to see in the way of art, it’s worth the visit to see first-hand how the two of them lived until Gala’s death in 1982, after which Dalí moved to Figueres. Visitor numbers are strictly controlled and you have to book a visit beforehand.
Tours take in most of the house, and include Dalí’s studio, the exotically draped model’s room, the couple’s master bedroom and bathroom, a secondary workshop in an olive grove and, perhaps best of all, the oval-shaped sitting room that Dalí designed for Gala, which, apparently by accident, boasts stunning acoustics. You’ll also see the garden and swimming pool where the couple entertained guests – they didn’t like too many strangers trooping through their living quarters. The phallic-shaped pool and its various decorative features, including a giant snake and a stuffed lion, are a treat.
THE DALÍ TRIANGLE
There are three museums in the Costa Brava devoted to the life and work of Salvador Dalí and they’re known locally as the Dalí Triangle. The Teatre-Museu Dalí in Figueres provides a display of the breadth of his art and his consummate creative skill, whereas the Casa-Museu Castell Gala Dalí, northwest of Girona, reveals the artist’s complex personal relationship with his Russian wife and muse, Gala. Famously, he was only allowed to enter her home with permission; he repaid her with mischief by painting false radiators on the covers she had insisted he install to hide the real ones. You can also gain insight into the artist at Casa-Museu Salvador Dalí (see above) in Portlligat, next to Cadaqués, which was his only fixed home from 1930 until 1982, when he moved into Gala’s castle. The casa is a tortuous maze of a home made up of fishermen’s huts that were successively acquired and strung together.
Cap de Creus
Museum Summer Mon–Wed, Sat & Sun 10am–7pm, Thurs & Fri 10am–2pm & 3.30–6.30pm; rest of the year Mon–Fri 9am–4.30pm, Sat & Sun 9am–5pm • Free, or small entry fee depending on the exhibit • Creuers Cadaqués 972 159 462, creuerscadaques.cat
A road winds 8km from Casa-Museu Salvador Dalí past glimpses of wave-plundered coves to the wind-buffeted Cap de Creus headland, the easternmost tip of the Iberian Peninsula, which provides breathtaking views of the coast and is topped by a lighthouse built in 1853. It’s now occupied by the Museu Espai Cap de Creus, with a small exhibition on the surrounding parc natural. If you fancy viewing the Cap de Creus from the sea, you’ll find a few boats along the seafront that do excursions, including those run by Creuers Cadaqués.
El Port de la Selva and around
Thirteen kilometres northwest of Cadaqués, EL PORT DE LA SELVA is centred on its fishing and pleasure ports, while either side is a ribbon of lovely coves with some of the cleanest water in the Mediterranean: those to the north are far more rugged and reached on foot or by sea, while the ones to the west are easier to get to and, therefore, more popular.
Sant Pere de Rodes
Tues–Sun: June–Sept 10am–8pm; Oct–May 10am–5pm; check hours with Cadaqués’ turisme • €5, Tues free
It’s 8km up the paved road from El Port de la Selva, via Selva de Mar, to the Benedictine monastery of Sant Pere de Rodes, just below the 670m-high summit of the Serra de Roda; approaching by foot, use the marked trail (1hr 30min) through the Vall de Santa Creu, which begins at Molí de la Vall.
The first written record of the monastery dates back to 879, and in 934 it became independent, answerable only to Rome: in these early years, and thanks especially to the Roman connection, the monks became tremendously rich and powerful. As the monastery was enlarged it was also fortified against attack, starting a period of splendour that lasted four hundred years before terminal decline set in. Many fine treasures were looted when it was finally abandoned in 1789, and it was also pillaged by the French during the Peninsular War; some of the rescued silver can be seen in Girona’s Museu d’Art.
Once one of the most romantic ruins in all of Catalunya, its central church universally recognized to be the precursor of the Catalan Romanesque style, the monastery was robbed of a great deal of its charm by overzealous restoration. No original columns or capitals remain in the cloister and some of the work looks too clinical. The redeeming feature, apart from the view, is the Catedral, which retains its original stonework from the tenth to fourteenth centuries, including eleventh-century column capitals carved with wolves’ and dogs’ heads. Nearby is the peaceful pre-Romanesque church of Santa Elena, all that remains of the small rural community that grew up around the monastery.
Castell de Sant Salvador
Above the monastery (and contemporary with it) stands the much more atmospheric, ruined Castell de Sant Salvador, a thirty-minute scramble up a steep, narrow path. This provided the perfect lookout site for the frequent invasions (French or Moorish) which normally came from the sea; in the event of attack, fires were lit on the hill to warn the whole surrounding area.
Arrival and Departure: el port de la selva and around
By bus A daily bus travels from Figueres to El Port de la Selva (30min), though there’s currently no public transport to Sant Pere de Rodes.

< Back to Catalunya
Girona and around
Medieval, beautifully preserved Girona, which is accessible within an hour from the sea, offers a refreshing change from the sun-and-sand hedonism of the Costa Brava. This elegant, provincial capital features a walled medieval quarter, Barri Vell, perched on a hill above the city – a delight to explore, with narrow cobbled alleyways, balconied houses and shady little plaças. Clinging to the banks of the Ríu Onyar, as it meanders through the centre of town, is a long row of picturesque pastel-hued houses, the Cases de l’Onyar.
Historically, Girona has seen it all – at least by Spanish standards. The Romans settled here, and called the town Gerunda. Girona then became an Islamic town after the Moors conquered Spain. A vibrant Jewish community also flourished here for more than six centuries, and Girona’s Call, the medieval Jewish quarter, remains one of the best preserved in Spain. Elsewhere, you’ll spy a fetching mix of architectural styles, from Romanesque to modernisme. Girona also features a range of excellent museums, a lovely Catedral and lively arts and music festivals. Rambla de la Llibertat, running along the river, is the city’s grand promenade, where locals take their daily paseo past a bustling strip of shops and restaurants.
Northwest of Girona, in the town of Púbol, rises the Casa-Museu Castell Gala Dalí, a medieval castle-turned-museum about surreal master Salvador Dalí and his wife Gala.
The Catedral
Pl. de la Catedral • Daily: July–Aug 10am–7.30, Sept–Oct & April–June 10am–6.30pm; Nov–March 10am–5.30pm; hours may vary • €7, includes Basilica of Sant Feliu • 972 215 814, catedraldegirona.org
Looming majestically over the old quarter, Girona’s Catedral is an elegant amalgamation of architectural styles. The Romanesque cloister and tower are the only parts remaining from the original eleventh-century building, and the Catedral was continually rebuilt and expanded up to and throughout the eighteenth century. The splendid Gothic nave, dating from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, is the second widest of its kind in the world (after St Peter’s in Rome). Also impressive are the fourteenth-century silver altarpiece and Gothic tombs.
It’s well worth visiting the twelfth-century cloister (same hours as the Catedral), and the Tresor Capitular (Chapter Treasury), which features a wealth of religious artefacts, including medieval gold pieces, a fifteenth-century bible and the ornate sixteenth-century retablo of Santa Elena. The main attraction is a splendid Italian tapestry, which dates back to the twelfth century and depicts the Creation.
Museu d’Art
Pujada de la Catedral 12 • March–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–Feb Tues–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4.50 • 972 203 834, museuart.com
Housed in the Palau Episcopal (Bishop’s Palace) near the Catedral, Girona’s five storey Museu d’Art features a wide-ranging collection of Romanesque, Gothic and modern art, including beautifully preserved murals from local churches, fifteenth-century embroidery and rare stained-glass tables. Don’t miss the tenth-century portable altar from Sant Pere de Rodes and the impressive collection of modern Catalan art, such as sculptures by Olot artist Miquel Blay.
GIRONAMUSEUS CARD
The GironaMuseus card (gironamuseus.cat) offers discounted entry to six of Girona’s museums – the Museu d’Arqueologia de Catalunya, Museu d’Art, Museu d’Història de la Ciutat, Museu d’Història dels Jueus, Museu del Cinema and Casa Masó. Pay regular entry at any of the five, pick up the card and then you’ll receive fifty percent discount to the other museums. You can get the card at any of the museums covered by the card, or at the turisme.
Església de Sant Feliu
Pl. de Sant Feliu • Mon–Sat 10am–5.30pm, Sun 1am–5.30pm • €7, includes Catedral
The large Església de Sant Feliu is one of Girona’s most iconic churches, and it reveals an interesting transition between the Romanesque and Gothic styles. The thirteenth-century Romanesque interior is topped by a grand Gothic nave, and a Baroque tower looms over the western facade. The highlight is the Catalan Gothic statue, Crist Jacent (Recumbent Christ).
Banys Àrabs
C/Ferran el Catòlic • April–Sept Mon–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–March Mon–Sat 10am–2pm • €2 • 972 190 797, banysarabs.org
Built in the twelfth century, the Banys Àrabs (Arab baths) were inspired by the Romans’ public bathhouses, and are among the best preserved of their type in Spain. The Moorish-tinged Romanesque building contains several graceful rooms, each with its own pool: the frigidarium (cold-water room), whose elegant columns support a central dome; the tepidarium (warm-water room); and the caldarium, the steam room, which was heated by a roaring fire burning underneath. Also on view is the apodyterium (changing room), and there’s an outdoor terrace, a good vantage point to view both the building’s exterior and the surrounding Girona cityscape.
Museu Arqueologia de Catalunya
C/Santa Llúcia 8 • June–Sept Tues–Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–May Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4.50 •  972 202 632, mac.cat
The impressive Monestir de Sant Pere de Galligants, a Romanesque Benedictine monastery near the baths, houses the Museu Arqueologia de Catalunya. It features a large collection of finds from Girona excavations, including beautiful Hebrew tombstones, sections of Roman pillars and Bronze Age metalworks.
Passeig de la Muralla
Daily 10am–8pm • Free
One of the finest vantage points over Girona is from the Passeig de la Muralla, also known as the Passeig Arqueològic, a walkway along the ramparts and medieval city wall. You can gain access to it from various points, including from near the Museu Arqueologia. As you trudge along the perimeter of the walls, you can enjoy lovely views of Girona – over the colourful rooftops to the river snaking through the centre – and the surrounding Ter valley. The walkway has several exits along the way, and it ends at Pl. Catalunya, where you can descend and amble back into the old town.
Carrer de la Força and the Jewish Quarter
Girona’s Jewish community, known as the Call or the Aljama, existed for more than six hundred years, and the warren of narrow streets and alleyways around Carrer de la Força is widely regarded as one of the finest preserved Jewish neighbourhoods in Europe.
Centre Bonastruc ça Porta and Museu d’Història dels Jueus
C/la Força 8 • Mon–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4 • 972 216 761, girona.cat/call
The well-run Centre Bonastruc ça Porta, housed in a former synagogue, is home to the Museu d’Història dels Jueus, which does an excellent job of curating archeological and ethnological finds from Girona’s Jewish heritage. The exhibition covers themes such as festivals and tradition; the synagogue and cemetery; the diaspora; and the Inquisition, which features a display of original documents ordering the expulsion of all Jews from Spain. Other highlights include a gilded seal used for making Passover bread; a fourteenth-century limestone slab inscribed with Jewish law from a local synagogue; and a unique belt buckle, dating to between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries, engraved with what is believed to be the mythical Leviathan, which features in the Hebrew Bible.
JEWISH GIRONA
A Jewish community first settled in Girona in the late ninth century; by the tenth century, the Jews had become a prosperous and influential sector of the city’s society, but this all changed in the thirteenth century, when Gironan Jews became the victims of severe and unrelenting persecution. The entire Jewish quarter became a constant target of racist attacks and eventually became an isolated ghetto, in which the residents were virtually imprisoned, confined within neighbourhood limits and banned from the rest of the city. This continued until 1492, when all Jews were expelled from Spain. Life in the Call was bleak and presented an immense daily challenge: out of desperate necessity, residents created an underground community of tiny alleys and courtyards within which to survive.
Museu d’Història de la Ciutat
C/la Força 27 • Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4 • 972 222 229, girona.cat
Girona’s history is formidable, and the excellent Museu d’Història de la Ciutat offers a well-organized overview under one roof. There’s a wide range of Roman remains and modern arts and crafts on show, and the museum includes exhibits on the old fortified walls, and those who attacked them to plunder Girona; the history of the Catalan sardana dance and other folkloric traditions; and contemporary paintings by regional artists.
Casa Masó
Ballesteries 29 • Tues–Sat 10am–6pm; accessible via guided visits only; book online or by phone • €5 • 972 413 989, rafaelmaso.org
Step into early twentieth-century Girona at the superbly restored home of acclaimed Girona architect Rafael Masó (1880–1935), who formed a key part of the Catalan noucentisme cultural movement. Noucentisme, which took its name from the “1900s” (in Catalan, noucents), was both a continuation of modernisme and a reaction to it, with a style that was characterized by elegant classicism as well as a renewed civic and Catalan pride. Casa Masó is the only one of the famous houses on the Ríu Onyar that is open to the public, and the beautifully designed interior features period furnishings, as well as paintings, sculpture, ceramics and drawings from the eighteenth to twentieth centuries.
Museu del Cinema
C/Sèquia 1 • May, June & Sept Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 11am–3pm; July & Aug daily 10am–8pm; Oct–April Tues–Fri 10am–6pm, Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 11am–3pm; • €5, under-14s free, free 1st Sun of month • 972 412 777, museudelcinema.cat
The top-notch Museu del Cinema, based on an extraordinary private collection, is less a museum and more of what the curators call “cinema before cinema”, with an utterly intriguing array of the gadgets and artefacts that provided popular entertainment before cinema itself came along, from Indonesian shadow puppets to eighteenth- and nineteenth-century devices like phantasmagoria, fantascopes and magic lanterns. It’s all rounded up with movie memorabilia, including costumes from Tootsie and Hello Dolly.
Arrival and information: girona
By plane Girona-Costa Brava airport (barcelona-girona-airport.com), 13km south of the city, handles flights by airlines from throughout Europe. Sagalés Bus regularly does the 25min trip between the airport and the Girona bus station, and also to Barcelona’s Estació del Nord (1hr 10min). A taxi from the airport to central Girona costs around €27.
By train The train station is near Pl. d’Espanya, a 15–25min walk southwest from the Barri Vell. Girona is well connected by train; it’s on the train line between Barcelona (1hr 30min), Figueres (40min) and Portbou (1hr). The Barcelona–Paris high-speed train (2–4 trains daily) stops in Girona and Figueres, as does the high-speed Madrid–Marseille.
By bus The bus station is next to the train station. Teisa buses operate regularly to regional cities, including Besalú (50min) and Olot (a little over 1hr). Sarfa runs several buses in the summer from the airport to the coast, including Roses (1hr 30min) and Tossa de Mar (1hr).
Turisme C/Joan Maragall 2 (Mon–Sat 9am–8pm, Sun 9am–2pm; 972 226 575, girona.cat/turisme).
FEAST ACROSS CATALUNYA AT MERCAT DEL LLEÓ
Barcelona has the famous La Boquería; Girona’s version is the Mercat del Lleó (Mon–Thurs & Sat 7am–3pm, Fri 5pm–8pm; 972 483 749, mercatlleo.cat), a colourful, aromatic market that unfolds just east of the river on Pl. Calvet i Rubalcaba. The 60-plus stalls reflect the natural diversity of Catalunya – apples and pears from fragrant Girona orchards, mushrooms pulled from Pyrenean soil, pungent goat's cheeses from the Garrotxa region and vast displays of freshly caught seafood from the Mediterranean. Take a twirl through the market for a whiff of local flavour, and then refuel over a café at the market bar. For a deeper exploration of the market and Girona’s culinary heritage, check out Girona Food Tours (gironafoodtours.com; tours and fees vary), launched by two long-time Girona residents.
Accommodation
Girona has a wide variety of accommodation, from well-maintained hostels to historic hotels, many of which are central and within an easy stroll to the old quarter. In the surrounding countryside, you’ll also find a range of comfortable cases de pagés (casas rurales), including in the rustic hamlet of Bordils, which lies 10km northeast of town.

THE CITY
AC Hotel Palau de Bellavista Pujada Polvorins 1 872 080 670, marriott.com; map. The short trek uphill to this stylish, glass-wrapped hotel is worth it for the view alone. Take in panoramic vistas of Girona’s medieval quarter and beyond, and then relax in the sleek rooms, done up in bright whites and caramel browns. €92
Casa Cúndaro Pujada de la Catedral 9 972 223 583, casacundaro.com; map. Top off your experience of medieval Girona by staying at this family-run hotel, which features restored rooms and apartments in a historic Jewish home a short stroll from the Catedral. It may lack a contemporary shine, but it has history in spades, from wood-beam ceilings to stone walls to leather sofas. €85
Hostal Bellmirall C/Bellmirall 3 972 204 009, bellmirall.cat; map. Housed in a renovated fifteenth-century building, with comfortable rooms, a communal living room and a hearty continental breakfast. It’s right near the Catedral, so light sleepers may be woken up by the bell chimes. €80
Hotel Carlemany Pl. Miquel Santaló 972 211 212, thecarlemanyhotel.com; map. Modern hotel, geared more towards business travellers, but handily within walking distance of the train station. €115
Hotel Ciutat de Girona C/Nord 2 972 483 038, hotel-ciutatdegirona.com; map. This boutique hotel in the centre of town has modern rooms in muted greys and red. They also operate the Apartaments Plaça del Vi (from €290), comfortable, amenity-rich apartments that are ideal for longer stays or for groups. €150
Hotel Llegendes de Girona Catedral Portal de la Barca 4 972 220 905, llegendeshotel.com; map. Set in a magnificently restored eighteenth-century building, this handsome hotel is smack in the centre of town, near the Catedral (as the name indicates) and the Banys Àrabs. The comfortable rooms balance sleek amenities and crisp white bed linen with earthy touches like exposed brick walls and pine ceilings. Couples take note: the Eros Room is curated for couples, with furnishings like a tantric chair. €137
Nord 1901 C/Nord 7–9 972 411 522, nord1901.com; map. This lovely boutique hotel offers the best of all worlds. It’s central, in the heart of Girona. It’s housed in a historic building that was fully renovated in 2009, with plenty of luxurious and contemporary amenities. And it has one of the only gardens with private swimming pool in this part of town. Choose between handsome rooms or spacious apartments. Doubles €150, apartments €290
BORDILS
Can Carreras del Mas C/Creu 34, Bordils 972 490 276, cancarrerasdelmas.com; map. This welcoming, rustic casa rural has stone walls, brick-arched ceilings and a range of contemporary amenities, including a swimming pool. €85
Eating
Girona has a diversity of restaurants, including a top-notch selection serving Catalan cuisine, most famously at the Celler de San Roca, just out of town. The Old Town is sprinkled with restaurants and bars, while you’ll find breezy outdoor cafés along Rambla de la Llibertat and Pl. del Vi.

DINING WITH THE ROCA BROTHERS
Every year, restaurants around the world vie for first place in Restaurant magazine’s annual Top 50 list. And in 2013 and 2015, that honour went to El Celler de Can Roca. The Roca brothers – Joan, Josep and Jordi – had already been household names in Spain, but nabbing the top spots – twice – catapulted them onto the worldwide culinary stage. Their win was well-deserved, and each brother continues to work his speciality within the restaurant – Joan as the head chef, Jordi on desserts, and Josep on wine. If you don’t get a reservation at the restaurant, you can still sample the Roca magic – at their Rocambolesc Gelateria in Girona. The shop also functions as an introduction to the famous restaurant, with cookbooks and other information.
Café Le Bistrot Pujada Sant Domènec 4 972 218 803, cafelebistrot.com; map. Inviting restaurant with a belle époque interior and tables outside, where you can fill up on Catalan cuisine at decent prices – dishes €14–24. Daily 1–4pm & 8pm–midnight, sometimes later at weekends.
El Celler de Can Roca Can Sunyer 48, about 2.5km northwest of Girona, off the Taialà road 972 222 157, cellercanroca.com; map. The menu showcases Ferran Adrià-style renderings of Catalan cuisine. Among the 17-plus courses: a tiny olive tree hung with melting balls of olive oil ice cream; langoustine enveloped in a cocoa-bean sauce, served in a bowl the shape of a cocoa bean; and sea bream capped with a patchwork quilt of samfaina (Catalonia’s answer to ratatouille). Tasting menus start at €175, and reservations are of course essential. Your best bet is to book online – reservations are accepted up to 11 months in advance; a new month becomes available at midnight on the 1st day of every month. Tues 9–11pm, Wed–Sat 1–3.30pm & 9–11pm; closed from late Dec to mid-Jan, 1 week in Aug and Easter.
Divinum C/Albereda 7 872 080 218, divinum.cat; map. Feast on creative contemporary Catalan cuisine at this sleek restaurant, with dishes like succulent veal with port wine and apples, and sardines with strawberries and yogurt. Don’t miss the superb array of artisanal cheeses. This is a place where it’s well worth going for the tasting menu (€45; €73 with wine), which shows off the best of the kitchen. Dishes €14–26. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.45 & 8.30–11pm.
Massana C/Bonastruc de Porta 10 972 213 820, restaurantmassana.com; map. This elegant, deservedly celebrated restaurant takes locally sourced cuisine to a high art, serving such inventive dishes as juicy duck with herbal oils, pear and rosemary, and sea cucumber with a “veil” of bacon. Dishes €24–29; tasting menu €105. Tues 1.15–3.45pm, Wed–Sat 1.15–3.45pm & 8.30–10.45pm.
Mimolet C/Pou Rodó 12 972 202 124, mimolet.net; map. Classy, welcoming restaurant with a Catalan menu built around local produce, including monkfish with olives and foie with a sweet apple glaze. Menu starts at €18, while individual dishes range €18–24. Tues–Sat 1–3pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Rocambolesc Gelateria C/Santa Clara 50 972 416 667, rocambolesc.com; map. A Willy Wonka-esque ice-cream and sweets shop that serves freshly churned, all-natural ice cream – try the ever-popular baked apple flavour – with toppings like cotton candy and guava jam. Sun–Thurs noon–10pm, Fri & Sat noon–midnight.
Sentits Travessera de la Creu 33 972 299 386, restaurantsentits.com; map. Living up to its name, this elegant little spot appeals to all the senses (sentits). The menu springs from the hyper-local “Km 0” concept – seafood from the lonja (fish auction) at Blanes and Arenys de Mar, and vegetables from the gardens of the verdant Maresme along the Mediterranean. Dishes include smoked aubergine cream served with anchovies from nearby Escala. Mains €12–21. Mon–Thurs 1–4pm, Fri & Sat 1–4pm & 8–11pm.
El Tall Pl. de Catalunya 26 972 417 591, eltall.es; map. Sample translucent slivers of ham at the esteemed ham shop El Tall (The Slice) – and then pick up a package or five (from €44) to take home. This ham heaven has it all, from Spain’s house ham, jamón serrano, so named because it was traditionally cured in the mountains (sierras), to jamón iberico, including the “de bellota” variety, made from black-hooved Iberian pigs. Mon–Sat 10am–9pm.
drinking AND NIGHTLIFE
Girona’s nightlife caters to the sizeable university crowd, with rustic bars in Pl. de la Independencia and across the river along Rambla de la Llibertat, and splashier clubs (like Blau Club) further afield. The suburb of Pedret, about 700m north of the old town, also heats up at night with a string of clubs, while in the summer, everyone heads to the open-air bars, Les Carpes, which operate in the Parc de la Devesa, on the west side of the river in the modern part of town.

Blau Club Camp de les Lloses 8; map. About 2km south of town, this is where the cool kids come to groove and flirt, with DJs spinning tracks all night long on the weekends. Fri & Sat 11pm/midnight–late.
Lola Café C/Força 7 629 794 360; map. This lively, Latin-themed bar, in the middle of the old town, serves tasty tropical cocktails – mojitos, caipirinhas – and heats up with occasional live music, from rumba to salsa and more. Daily 6pm–3am.
Plaça del Vi 7 Pl. del Vi 7 972 215 604; map. Ease into the evening at this charming wine bar that has an apt location: Pl. del Vi (Wine Square). The bar’s well-curated wine list crisscrosses the globe, but ask for the day’s selection of local wine (from (4/glass) from the nearby Empordà wine region. Mon 7–11.30pm, Tues–Sat noon–11.30pm.
The River Café C/La Barca 2 972 228 245, rivercafegirona.com; map. This casual bar and café, with a large, sun-dappled terrace, is at the foot of the lovely Església de Sant Feliu. Enjoy cocktails, chilled beer, local wine and other beverages, from fresh-squeezed juice to coffee, as well as hearty sandwiches and burgers. Tues–Wed & Sun 9am–1am, Thurs–Sat 9am–2.30am, Sun 10am–3pm.
Sunset Jazz Club C/Jaume Pons i Martí 12 sunsetjazz-club.com; map. Near the old town, this lively joint hosts regular jazz concerts and jam sessions featuring musicians from around the country – and the world. You can enjoy potent cocktails poured with top-shelf alcohol, plus a good assortment of whiskies. Daily 9pm–closing (up to 2am).
Púbol
Salvador Dalí had many obsessions, but none quite like Gala, his beloved wife and lifelong muse, who he met when she was visiting Cadaqués in 1929 with her husband, French poet Paul Eluard. Dalí and Gala fell in love and married in 1934. Dalí lavished many gifts on her, including, in 1969, the medieval castle of Casa Púbol, which rises near the small village of Púbol, about 20km northeast from Girona. Gala lived here, and rumour has it that she entertained a string of lovers all the while, and imposed strict rules on Dalí, who supposedly had to get permission before he could visit. She stayed here until her death in 1982, when Dalí moved in. The artist made this his permanent base until 1984 when fire struck parts of the castle, prompting him to move to Figueres.
Casa-Museu Castell Gala Dalí
Mid-March to mid-June & mid-Sept to Oct Tues–Sun 10am–6pm; mid-June to mid-Sept daily 10am–8pm; Nov & Dec Tues–Sun 10am–5pm; closed Jan to mid-March • €8 • 972 488 655, salvador-dali.org • Regular Sarfa-run Girona–Palafrugell buses stop in La Pera, from where it’s 2km to Púbol (you’ll need to walk or take a taxi); the Barcelona–Portbou train stops in Flaça, which is 4km from Púbol
The castle, which is now the Casa-Museu Castell Gala Dalí, is decorated in vintage Dalí style, though parts of it are considerably more understated than other Dalí sights – it is one of three in the region. Stuffed animal heads protrude from walls, and dome ceilings are painted in quasi-religious motifs, but there are also quietly stark rooms with simple wood floors. Exhibits feature a supremely entertaining array of Dalí photos, particularly from his 1930s–40s heyday, while outside is an atmospheric swimming pool and garden, populated by sculptures of Richard Wagner, one of Dalí’s favourite composers.
< Back to Catalunya
Figueres
It is a testament to Dalí’s enduring popularity that his eponymous museum, in the middle of FIGUERES, 35km northeast of Girona, is the most visited sight in Spain after Madrid’s Prado and Bilbao’s Guggenheim. There’s more to Figueres, of course, but you wouldn’t immediately know it from the crowds tripping over themselves to get to the museum. Native son Dalí returned to Figueres specifically to create this homage to Surrealism, and what an homage it is: wonderfully bizarre and cheekily interactive, the museum is all you’d expect from the world’s most celebrated Surrealist.
By all means make the museum your first stop – but leave yourself some time to roam Figueres afterwards. Cutting a wide swathe through the centre of town is La Rambla de Figueres, a graceful, leafy pedestrian street lined with modern houses and outdoor cafés. The Museu de l’Empordà features local archeological finds and the nearby Castell de Sant Ferran is a massive fortification on sprawling grounds.
Teatre-Museu Dalí
Teatre-Museu Dalí Pl. Gala i Salvador Dalí • Dalí Joies Corner of C/María Àngels Vayreda and Pujada del Castell • Both: March–May Tues–Sun 9.30am–6pm, June–Sept daily 9am–8pm, Oct Tues–Sun 9.30am–6pm, Nov–Feb Tues–Sun 10.30am–6pm; last admission 45min before closing • €14 for Teatre includes entry to Dalí Joies • 972 677 500, salvador-dali.org
One thing is certain: you won’t have trouble spotting the Teatre-Museu Dalí. Just look for a roof topped with giant eggs and a red facade with protruding bread loaves. Housed in a former theatre – which is particularly apt, for this most theatrical of artists – the museum is designed around a large courtyard with white ceramic sinks and gold mannequins inspired by Oscar statues. Light streams into the building through a transparent, geodesic dome ceiling that resembles the eye of a fly, in a nod to Dalí’s fixation with insects. Incidentally, the artist had no problem with flies, but was supposedly repulsed by ants, which he depicted crawling out of eyeballs and such in his paintings.
Dalí created the museum to be an all-round sensory – and surreal – experience. Look through binoculars to see Gala Nude Looking at the Sea Which at Twenty Metres is Transformed into a Portrait of Abraham Lincoln, or revive a “dead” body in a coffin made of circuit boards. And check out The Face of Mae West That Can Be Used as a Drawing Room, in which Mae’s giant nose has a fireplace (complete with logs) built into each nostril, and her fleshy red lips are a couch.
Inside the Sala de Tresor are housed many of Dalí’s better-known works, including The Spectre of Sex Appeal, which explores the artist’s famous sex phobia. Other emblematic works include Soft Self-Portrait with Fried Bacon, in which Dalí’s dripping visage is held up by little sticks, and Venus de Milo with Drawers.
The museum also features a terrific line-up of changing temporary exhibits, which have included everything from Dali self-portraits to the artist’s three-dimentional art.
Dalí, fittingly, is buried in his fantastical museum. By 1984, he had moved to the nearby Torre Galtea, where he died in 1989. His body now lies behind a simple granite slab in a basement gallery of the museum. The museum ticket includes entry to the nearby Dalí Joies exhibit, featuring jewels designed by Dalí.
DALÍ BY NIGHT
The Dalí Museum may be surreal by day, but is even more so at night (and especially after a glass of cava). In the summer, generally from late July to late August, the museum opens its doors at night (10pm–1am; last entry at 12.30am). For an admission price of €15, visitors are offered a glass of cava on one of the terraces, where they also show a film on Dalí. There is limited capacity, so it’s worth booking ahead, which you can do on the museum website (salvador-dali.org).
Museu de l’Empordà
Rambla 2 • May–Oct Tues–Sat 11am–8pm, Sun 11am–2pm; Nov–April Tues–Sat 11am–7pm, Sun 11am–2pm • €4, or free with Teatre-Museu Dalí ticket • 972 502 305, museuemporda.org
The Museu de l’Empordà explores the region’s history, with exhibits covering Greek and Roman archeological remains, frescoes, sacred art and medieval sculpture. It also features a well-curated collection of nineteenth- and twentieth-century art by an assortment of well-known Catalan and Spanish artists, from Sorolla and Miró to Tàpies to Dalí.
Museu del Joguet de Catalunya
Hotel Paris, C/Sant Pere 1 • June–Sept Mon–Sat 10am–6pm & 4–7pm, Sun 11am–7pm; Oct–May Tues–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun 11am–2pm • €6 • 972 504 508, mjc.cat
From ancient toy wooden tops and bronze Roman rattles to candy-red cars, miniature circuses and twentieth-century optical-illusion games, the Museu del Joguet de Catalunya (Toy Museum of Catalunya) offers a playful glimpse into the history of having fun. Particularly curious are the religious items, which include altar boys’ clothes from 1905 and mini-churches with tiny moveable priest figures. Don’t miss the traditional caganers, little figurines of squatting peasants taking a break to “fertilize the earth”, who are cheekily hidden in the back of Catalan nativity scenes. The museum also hosts lively temporary exhibits, such as the recent “Salvador Dalí: the first twenty years”.
Castell de Sant Ferran
Daily: May–June & mid-Sept to Oct 10.30am–6pm; July to mid-Sept 10am–8pm; Nov–April 10.30am–3pm; last admission 1hr before closing • €3 • castillosanfernando.org
The impressive eighteenth-century fortified Castell de Sant Ferran, one of the largest in Europe, stands 1km northwest of Figueres. Explore the sprawling castle grounds and walk its 4km perimeter and you’ll get a sense of just how massive it is. It was at Sant Ferran that the last official meeting of Spain’s Republican parliament took place, on February 1, 1939, before it surrendered to Franco’s forces. More recently, Colonel Tejero was imprisoned here after his failed coup attempt in 1981.
Arrival and information: figueres
By train The train station is just east of the city centre. Figueres is on the train line from Barcelona, via Girona, to Portbou on the French border. Services run regularly between Figueres and Girona (up to 20 daily; 40min), and Barcelona (3–6 daily; just over 2hr). High-speed rail connects Perpignan and Figueres (2–4 daily), stopping at Figueres-Vilafant, 2km west of Figueres; the route continues on to Barcelona. Teisa buses run from the city centre, and the bus and train stations, to Figueres-Vilafant station.
By bus The bus station is east of the city centre, just south of the train station. Buses operate regularly to regional cities, including Girona (1hr) and Barcelona (2hr 30min).
Turisme Pza. del Sol (late June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 9am–8pm, Sun 10am–3pm; mid-Sept to late June generally Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 503 155, figueresciutat.cat).
Accommodation
Hostel Figueres C/Tints 22 630 680 575, hostelfigueres.com; map. Well-run, warm and friendly hostel, near the Dalí Museum, with a range of clean dorm rooms and doubles with shared bath and one apartment that can sleep up to five (€65). Dorms €18, doubles €36
Hotel Duran C/Lausaca 5 972 501 250, hotelduran.com; map. Long-running hotel – Dalí and Gala were frequent visitors – that has been artfully updated, with inviting rooms of polished wood floors, muted colours and modern baths. Keep an eye out for original Dalí works displayed throughout. The restaurant serves tasty Catalan cuisine. €70
Hotel Pirineos Avda. Salvador Dalí 68 972 500 312, hotelpirineospelegri.com; map. Central, comfortable and renovated in 2016, Hotel Pirineos has spacious, handsome rooms with well-equipped bathrooms. €60
Hotel Ronda Avda. Salvador Dalí 17 972 503 911, hotelronda.com; map. It looks a bit antiseptic from the outside, but this modern hotel has elegant rooms and a friendly restaurant with terrace. €85
Eating
Figueres is crammed with casual restaurants, many of which cater to the crowds visiting Museu Dalí. You will find some good choices, though, slightly beyond the centre.

Antaviana C/Llers 5–7 972 510 377, restaurantantaviana.cat; map. The airy dining room, with light woods and sleek lighting, matches the contemporary Catalan cuisine, with a focus on seafood, from fresh mussels to cod with spinach. They also serve a good selection of local Empordà wines. Dishes €11–23. Mon–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8.30–11.45pm.
Hotel Duran C/Lausaca 5 972 501 250, hotelduran.com; map. You’re in good company: Dalí used to have his own dining room here, where creative regional cuisine has been prepared by the Duran family for generations. Mar i muntanya dishes might include cuttlefish and meatballs or prawns and sausage. Dishes €13–22. Daily 12.30–4pm & 8.30–11pm.
El Motel Hotel Empordà, Avda. Salvador Dalí i Domènech 170, 1km northwest of Figueres 972 500 562, elmotel.cat; map. Before the foams of Ferran Adrià and the “emotional cuisine” of the Roca brothers, there was the Hotel Empordà (originally called the Motel Ampurdan, in part because it sits on a busy roadway), where chef Jaume Subirós is credited with elevating traditional cooking from home kitchen to restaurant quality. Considered the birthplace of modern Catalan cuisine, El Motel (as the restaurant is now called in homage to its roots) continues to serve some of the finest and most innovative food in the region. The chefs find inspiration in the sea, with dishes like wild sea bass from Cadaqués with lime leaves and polenta, and rock lobster from Cap de Creus with fragrant rice, shrimp from Roses and sea cucumbers. Dishes start at €22. Book ahead. Daily 1–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
< Back to Catalunya
La Garrotxa
The fertile landscape of La Garrotxa, which unfolds west of Girona and Figueres, is anchored by the historic capital of Olot. To the east lies lovely, quiet Besalú; to the north, mountain peaks march along the French border; and to the south extends the Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica, a verdant, hilly terrain punctuated by volcanic cones and craters.
Besalú
Medieval BESALÚ, about 50km north of Girona, is a captivating sight: the impressive eleventh-century Romanesque Pont Fortificat spans the River Fluvià at the entrance to the town, beyond which rise church towers amid stone houses. These days, Besalú is a small, humble town, but its beautifully preserved core, with dark little streets, arcaded shops and elegant historic architecture, is testament to its formidable past. Roman, Visigothic and Muslim rulers all passed through, but Besalú’s most important role came between the tenth and twelfth centuries, when it served as the capital of the region until power was transferred to Barcelona.
Església de Sant Pere and around
The thirteenth-century Casa de la Vila, which now houses the ajuntament, rises over Pza. de la Llibertat. To the west of Llibertat lies a spacious plaça, the Prat de Sant Pere, which is presided over by the tenth-century Benedictine monastery Església de San Pere. Keep an eye out for the beautiful Gothic window on the west facade. The nearby Romanesque Església de Sant Vicenç features impressive Gothic capitals. Both churches are usually only open for services, but guided tours are sometimes organized by the turisme.
Miqvé
Baixada de Mikwe • Guided tours: summer usually daily noon, 1.30pm, 4.30pm & 6pm; check with turisme for times the rest of the year
Similar to Girona, Besalú had a Jewish community from the ninth century onwards, until the Jews were forced out of town in 1436 due to Christian persecution. Their Miqvé, said to be the only existing Jewish ritual bath in Spain, sits near the river and features a barrel-vaulted underground stone room. The bath was also once connected to the town’s synagogue, the remains of which were discovered nearby.
arrival and Information: Besalú
By bus The bus stop is on the main Olot–Girona road; there are regular buses to and from Figueres (30min) and Girona (50min).
Turisme Pl. de la Llibertat (daily 10am–2pm & 4–7pm; 972 591 240, besalu.cat). In addition to guided tours of the churches and Miqvé, the turisme also offers tours encompassing all of Besalú’s sights, usually daily at 5pm, but hours are subject to change.
Accommodation and eating
Cúria Reial Pl. de la Llibertat 14 972 590 263, curiareial.com. Enjoy the twin pleasures of top-notch local cuisine and the beautiful outdoors at this friendly, mid-priced restaurant, where you can dine alfresco on the terrace overlooking the historic bridge. Mains €15–20. Mon & Wed–Sun 12.30–4pm & 8.30–10.30pm; closed Mon dinner in winter.
Els Jardins de la Martana Pont 2 972 590 009, lamartana.com. For a feel of Besalú’s history, bed down in this antique mansion, with its faded but graceful rooms and leafy gardens, that sits across from the Pont Fortificat. €120
Pont Vell C/Pont Vell 24 972 591 027, restaurantpontvell.com. Named after the bridge that it overlooks, this rustic restaurant with a lovely outdoor terrace offers traditional Catalan cuisine with a modern twist, including squid stuffed with wild mushrooms; escudella, a typical Catalan stew of meat and vegetables; and the Pont Vell speciality – sweet and sour rabbit. Mains €15–25. Wed–Mon 1.30–4pm & 8.30–10.30pm; occasionally closed Sun & Mon nights.
Beget
The tiny village of BEGET, about 30km northwest of Besalú, is nestled so deeply in a valley that you don’t see it until you’re almost upon it. And when you do, it’s a handsome sight: Beget looks much as it did centuries ago, with narrow cobbled streets, little bridges and stone houses. A stillness fills the graceful twelfth-century church, Sant Cristòfor, which rises over the village. The church (sporadic opening times; enquire in the village) is notable for its Majestat, a carved-wood figure of Christ in a full-length tunic, arms outstretched.
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE: BEGET
By bus and taxi It’s hard to reach Beget without your own transport. If you don’t have your own wheels, the best option is to take a bus to Camprodon, and then hire a taxi.
Eating
Can Jeroni C/Bellaire 17–19 972 741 239, canjeroni.net. Friendly, family-run restaurant serving seasonal Catalan cuisine (€20-plus à la carte), with seating near an old bridge and with views of the church. Daily 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm; limited hours in winter.
Olot
La Garrotxa’s provincial capital, OLOT, is an amiable, mid-sized town with busy shopping streets and a breezy Pl. Mayor. Passeig d’en Blay, the central rambla, is flanked by lovely historic buildings and dotted with lively cafés. Olot’s varied countryside, marked by sheer cliffs, verdant valleys and extinct volcanic cones and craters, inspired the highly respected nineteenth- and twentieth-century Olot School of landscape painters, whose works you can view in the town’s Museu de la Garrotxa.
Museu de la Garrotxa
C/Hospici 8 • Summer Tues–Fri 10am–1pm & 3–6pm, Sat 11am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 11am–2pm; rest of year, hours may vary • €3 • 972 271 166, olotcultura.cat
Nature was at the core of the Olot School of painters, who explored Garrotxa’s unique landscape on canvas, from rolling, pastoral hills to desolate terrain punctuated by stark trees. The school, founded by Joaquim Vayreda i Vila, was also influenced by the French Impressionists. You can view many of its striking works in the well-curated Museu de la Garrotxa, housed in a renovated eighteenth-century hospital. The museum also features modernista sculptures by Miquel Blay and Josep Clarà, and exhibits on the history of Olot and Catalan arts and crafts.
Parc Nou and Museu dels Volcans
Avda. Santa Coloma, 1km southwest of town centre • Jardí Botànic Daily April–Sept 9am–9pm; Oct–March 9am–7pm (sometimes 6pm) • Free • Museu dels Volcans Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 3–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm; rest of year, hours may vary • €3 • 972 266 762, olotcultura.cat
Parc Nou is a nine-acre municipal park that encompasses the well-tended, leafy Jardí Botànic and the Casal dels Volcans, a Palladian building that houses the helpful Centro d’Informació del Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica, where you can pick up park maps and other information. The park also hosts a variety of open-air musical concerts and festivals, often in the summer. Also here is the Museu dels Volcans, which features exhibits on the volcanic history of the region, including rock samples and photos.
CYCLING THE CARRILET
Where trains once rumbled down tracks, cyclists can now pedal amid quiet greenery. The Ruta del Carrilet (viesverdes.cat) are traffic-free trails for pedestrians and cyclists that follow unused train lines, offering the chance to ride or stroll through the rolling Catalan countryside, passing small towns and villages along the way. Among the most popular is the 54km Olot-to-Girona route. In Olot, the trail starts at Fonts Sant Roc (Sant Roc Springs), just southwest of the city, near the Fluvià River; enquire at the turisme for further information and directions. The route is relatively flat and therefore appropriate for all levels, and is especially popular with families.
Arrival and information: olot
By bus The bus station is at the east end of C/Bisbe Lorenzana, the main thoroughfare. Teisa runs regular buses to and from Barcelona (just under 3hr) and Girona (just over 1hr).
Turisme C/Hospici 8, inside the Museu Comarcal (summer Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 260 141, turismeolot.cat). The turisme has up-to-date lists of local accommodation and transport timetables, and also sells a joint ticket to the museums in the area (€3–5 depending on number of museums you visit).
Accommodation and eating
Olot has a range of decent hotels and hostels in town, but some of the most appealing accommodation options are the manors and B&Bs in the surrounding countryside, many of which make the most of their proximity to the Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica, with terraces, hearty breakfasts to fuel your hiking, and bikes for hire.

Ca l’Enric Carretera de Camprodon, Vall de Bianya, 7km northwest of Olot  972 290 015, restaurantcalenric.cat. Locally sourced Catalan cuisine is taken to a high art at this long-running restaurant that’s set in a beautifully renovated nineteenth-century country house. Dishes range from beef tartare with herbs to rabbit with wild mushrooms. The restaurant also features a variety of tasting menus (from €75). Dishes €26–34. Tues, Wed & Sun 1.15–3.15pm, Thurs–Sat 8.45–10.30pm.
Les Cols Carretera de la Canya, on the northern outskirts of Olot 973 269 209, lescols.com. Fresh produce reigns supreme at this elegant restaurant, where the menu might include cod with hot pepper oil or green beans in charcoal tempura. Tasting menu starts at €95. Reservations advised. Wed–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm, Sun 1–3.30pm; sometimes closed two weeks in summer.
Hotel Borrell C/Nonet Escubós, Olot 972 276 161, hotelborrell.com. Near the centre of town, next to Pl. Catalunya, this small hotel has simple rooms with hardwood floors and decently sized bathrooms. €85
Mas El Guitart Vall de Bianya, 7km northwest of Olot, just above Sant Andreu de Socarrats village 972 292 140, guitartrural.com. Comfortable country house, with hardwood-floor rooms and cabins. There’s also a soothing spa that offers therapies including hot-stone massages and reflexology. €70
Torre Malagrida Pg. de Barcelona 15, Olot 972 264 200, xanascat.cat. This central, well-kept youth hostel with simple dorms is housed in a nineteenth-century tower set amid gardens. Dorms €18
VOLCANIC CUISINE
The volcanic fields of the Garrotxa region aren’t just an intrinsic part of the landscape – they’re also an intrinsic part of the local cuisine. Garrotxa is famed for its fertile soil, which has given way to an equally fertile and rich Cuina Volcànica (cuinavolcanica.cat). Traditional ingredients – all locally produced – include Santa Pau haricot beans, black radishes, mushrooms and sheep’s cheese. Olot, Besalú and Santa Pau have a variety of top-notch Cuina Volcànica restaurants, such as La Deu. If you’re in the area in January, head to Santa Pau for its Fira de Fesol, which celebrates the region’s famous beans.
Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica
The sprawling Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica makes up much of the Baixa Garrotxa region. You won’t see lava flows and smoke-snorting volcanoes, though – the last eruption was almost 11,000 years ago, and the park is in fact largely green and verdant, with a remarkably fertile soil. The volcanic landscape comes in the shape of the park’s forty cones, which vary widely in size, the bigger ones topping 170m.
There are numerous trails through the park – if you’re short on time, you can opt to take shorter trails to several of the volcanoes that start at car parks around Olot. Posted signs point out those that lead to the two easiest cones to access from town: Volcà del Croscat, the youngest cone in the park, and Volcà de Santa Margarida.
arrival and information: Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica
Accessing the park You’ll need your own wheels to access the park; there is a regular Teisa bus service between Girona and Olot.
Centro d’Informació del Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica Casal del Volcans, Olot (Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 268 112, gencat.cat/parcs/garrotxa). The main park information office is in Parc Nou in Olot, where you can pick up helpful hiking maps.
Turisme Pl. Mayor, Santa Pau (Mon & Wed–Sat noon–6pm, Sun 11am–3pm; 972 680 349, santapau.com).
Accommodation and eating
Cal Sastre C/Cases Noves, near Plaçeta dels Balls, Santa Pau 972 680 049, calsastre.com. For a taste of the famous Santa Pau fesols (haricot beans), dine at this established Catalan restaurant, which also doubles as a handsome hotel (price includes breakfast). Tues–Sat 1–3.30pm & 9–10.30pm, Sun 1–3.30pm; closed Feb. €110
Can Blanc Ptges de la Deu, around 1.5km north of Olot 972 276 020, canblanc.es. The location here is the big draw: it’s in the Parque Natural, and surrounded by greenery, yet still within easy reach of town (around 30min on foot, should you want to walk). Rooms are comfortable, and nearby is the historic La Deu Restaurant. €65
La Deu Restaurant Carretera de la Deu s/n, near Can Blanc, about 1.5km south of Olot  972 261 004, ladeu.es. This established restaurant, which sits in the Parque Natural and dates back to 1885, is helmed by the fourth and fifth generations of the Reixac family. The menu is rooted in Cuina Volcànica, and includes their signature La Deu potatoes; escalivada, a typical Catalan dish of grilled vegetables; and pig’s trotters. The menu is €14. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8–10.30pm, Sun 1.30–3.30pm.
Santa Pau
Medieval Santa Pau, 9km southwest of Olot, sits right in the middle of the volcanic region, and is a great jumping-off point for exploration. The beautifully preserved village features stone houses, narrow lanes, ancient archways and the thirteenth-century Pl. Mayor, once the Firal dels Bous (Cattle Market). Santa Pau is also known for its fesols (haricot beans), which figure prominently in the local cuisine. The village celebrates its beloved bean in the Fira de Sant Antonic, also known as the Fira de Fesol (Fesol Festival), in mid- or late January.
< Back to Catalunya
Vic
The Serra del Montseny, a towering granite mountain range with lushly forested slopes, looms southwest of Girona. On the west of the range, 34km southwest of Olot and easily accessible as a day-trip from Barcelona, is the amiable, well-preserved town of Vic. Vic is considered one of the more quintessential Catalan centres, both because the locals have especially strong Catalan pride, and also because it’s near the Ripoll area, cradle of Catalan history. Vic was once the capital of an Iberian tribe, and in the second century became a Roman settlement – you’ll spy various Roman remains, including parts of a temple, scattered around town.
Vic also hosted a prosperous medieval market, and the town has a yearly Mercat Medieval de Vic (firesifestes.com) in its old quarter in early December, celebrating its medieval past. Vic is defined by its elegant, enormous Pl. Mayor, ringed by historic, porticoed buildings, which features a colourful food market twice a week (Tues & Sat) – and if there’s one thing to buy, it’s Vic’s famous sausages (llonganissa or fuet), which are heralded throughout Catalunya and perfect for tossing into the suitcase to bring home.
The Catedral and Museu Episcopal
Catedral Pl. de la Catedral • Daily 10am–1pm & 4–7pm • €2 for cloister and crypt • Museu Episcopal Pl. Bisbe Oliba 3 • April–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–March Tues–Fri 10am–1pm & 3–6pm, Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €7 • 938 869 360, museuepiscopalvic.com
Vic’s Neoclassical Catedral looms over the centre of town; inside, striking murals depict scenes from the Bible by Catalan artist Josep Maria Sert. The nearby Museu Episcopal features a superb collection of sacred art from the eleventh to thirteenth centuries, including an alabaster altarpiece depicting the Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ. The museum also showcases an array of art and religious artefacts culled from Pyrenean churches, making it one of the most important collections of Catalan Romanesque art outside of the Museu d’Art de Catalunya in Barcelona.
Arrival and information: VIC
By train and bus Trains and Sagalés buses run regularly to and from Barcelona (1hr 20min). It’s a short walk east from the (adjacent) train and bus stations to the centre of town.
Turisme Just off Pl. Mayor (Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10.30am–1.30pm; 938 862 091, victurisme.cat).
Accommodation and eating
Arròs i Peix C/la Riera 30 938 832 564, arrosipeix.cat. As the name suggests, this stylish restaurant excels at rice and fish, including robust paellas, ruby-red tuna tartare and ink-black arròs negre (rice with squid ink). Pair the meal with a local wine – they have an excellent array, including from Priorat and Empordà. Tapas and dishes €9–15. Tues–Sat 1–3pm & 8–11pm; Sun 1–3pm.
D.O. Vic C/Sant Miquel dels Sants 16 938 832 396, restaurante-do-vic.com. This creative, Cuina Catalana restaurant lives up to its name of “Denominació d’Origen”, focusing on locally sourced ingredients. Dishes might include artichoke hearts with cod and tuna tartare with golden apples. Tasting menu starts at €30. Wed–Sun 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Estació del Nord Pl. de l’Estació 4 935 166 292, estaciodelnord.com. It’s hard to get any more convenient than the sleek little boutique hotel on the upper level of Vic’s train station. The fully refurbished hotel has well-maintained rooms, with lots of white and pale, earthy colours. €75
El Jardinet C/Corretgers 8 938 862 877, eljardinetdevic.com. Dine on seasonal Mediterranean cuisine at this welcoming restaurant which has a well-priced weekday lunchtime menú del día for €14, and €19 for dinner. They also offer a more gourmet menu for €26, which might include foie gras and fresh tuna. Tues–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8.30–11pm, Sun 1–3.30pm.
NH Ciutat de Vic Ptge. Can Mastrot 938 892 551, nh-hotels.com. This contemporary hotel, in the heart of town, has comfortable rooms with hardwood floors. The well-run restaurant serves an ample buffet breakfast. €95
Seminar Allotjaments Ronda Camprodon 2 938 861 555, seminarivic.cat. This converted seminary, which lies a 5min stroll north of the old town, offers basic but comfortable rooms with private baths, as well as a cafetería that serves Catalan cuisine and breakfasts (from €69 half board; €76 full board). The grounds also feature a chapel and breezy garden. €60
< Back to Catalunya
The Catalan Pyrenees
Looming gracefully over northern Catalunya, the snow-tipped Pyrenees form a mighty barrier between the Iberian Peninsula and the rest of Europe. You can ski and hike throughout these mountains, making use of a range of ski centres and vast stretches of natural parkland. Imposing peaks reach more than 3400m, while fierce rivers cleave the green valleys; tucked away in the valleys and clinging to the mountains are centuries-old alpine villages, each with its own Romanesque church, collectively forming an open-air rural museum of early medieval architecture, particularly in the beautiful Vall de Boí.
The Pyrenees are easy to reach from Barcelona – Ripoll, a gateway town to the mountains, is accessible in less than three hours. The ski scene dominates the mountains northwest of Ripoll, while summer draws hikers and trekkers. North of Ripoll is the village of Ribes de Freser, where you can board the famous cremallera railway which snakes its way up to the small ski town and pilgrimage site of Núria – one of the most magnificent journeys in the Pyrenees.
West of here stretches the formidable Serra del Cadí, which offers superb hiking and trekking around one of Catalunya’s most recognizable peaks, the Pedraforca. To the north, along the French border, is La Cerdanya, a lush, sunny Pyrenean valley that’s especially popular in the summer with outdoor enthusiasts. Cerdanya’s capital is the lively town of Puigcerdà, while just across the border sits the geographical oddity of Llívia, a Spanish town fully enclosed by France. In winter, skiers flock to La Molina and Masella, the two big ski resorts in the area.
The mountainous terrain around La Seu d’Urgell, still further west, offers some of the best trekking in the Pyrenees. Whitewater aficionados get their adrenalin rush in the Noguera Pallaresa valley, where churning rivers offer the best rafting in the region. Finally, in the far northwest unfolds the rugged Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici, and lush Val d’Aran, one of Spain’s top ski resorts.
LONG-DISTANCE HIKING IN THE PYRENEES
Running roughly parallel to the GR10, which runs on the French side, the GR11 is a network of long-distance hiking trails which traverses the Spanish Pyrenees from one end to the other. Estimated to be about 850–900km in length, it runs from the Golfo de Vizcaya (Bay of Biscay) in the Basque region to the west to Cap de Creus, near Cadaqués in the east. For seasoned trekkers, there is also the HRP (Haute Randonnée Pyrénéenne), which follows a higher and wilder course in the Pyrenees, crisscrossing the Spanish–French border along the way. It runs largely through the Parc National des Pyrenées in France but also takes in parts of the Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici. In Spain, you can get more general information about the GR routes from the Federación Española de Deportes de Montaña y Escalada (FEDME; Spanish Mountain Sports Federation; fedme.es), though the website is mostly in Spanish only. Tourist offices, refuges and many hotels in the Pyrenees can also supply maps, information on accommodation along the route and more.
Ripoll
The quiet mountain town of RIPOLL, which serves as a good starting point for exploring the Pyrenees, is known as the cradle of Catalunya, as it was here that founding father Guifré el Pélos (Wilfred the Hairy) staked his claim to what became the Autonomous Community of Catalunya. The chief reason to visit is to view the impressive Benedictine Monestir de Santa Maria. Ripoll also holds an international music festival in July and August in the fourteenth-century church of Sant Pere, and is the starting point for a beautiful Via Verde (greenway, viesverdes.cat) – trek or cycle the 15km La Ruta del Ferro i del Carbó (Iron and Coal), which starts near the train station, to Sant Joan de les Abadesses.
Monestir de Santa Maria
Monastery Pl. Abat Oliba • Daily: April–Sept 10am–2pm & 4–7pm; Oct–March 10am–1.30pm & 3.30–6pm • €5.50 • monestirderipoll.cat
One of the few parts of the building to survive a tragic fire, the splendid twelfth-century facade of the west portal of the Monestir de Santa Maria, which was founded some four hundred years earlier, is considered one of Spain’s great works of Romanesque art. The portal showcases a series of sculptures depicting the Creation and other biblical scenes in gorgeous detail – singing angels, the stories of Moses and Solomon and mythical beasts representing the Apostles, among other scenes – giving it its nickname as the “Stone Bible” or “Ripoll Bible”. The cloister has also aged beautifully, while the nave is a replica of the original structure that was built over Guifré el Pélos’ tomb.
Museu Etnogràfic de Ripoll
Pl. Abat Oliba • Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4 • 972 703 144, museuderipoll.org
The Museu Etnogràfic de Ripoll, one of Catalunya’s first ethnographic museums, explores the history of Ripoll and inland Catalunya through its culture, society, religion and trades, with exhibits on everything from farming methods to folklore. Ripoll had a thriving metalworking industry in the Middle Ages, and later became a production centre for weapons and firearms, and exhibits include ancient keys, forged ironwork and early rifles and other weapons.
DRAGONS AND DEVILS
Pleasant Berga, 30km west of Ripoll, has the usual historical draws – an old town, the remains of a castle – but the reason that it’s on the map, so to speak, is as host of one of Catalunya’s most famous festivals, the Festa del Patum. During Corpus Christi week, Berga’s otherwise staid streets fill with parade floats of pagans and fantasy creatures – the famous gegants, devils, dragons spewing fireworks and dragon-slayers – while revellers dance on the sidelines and behind the floats. The festival is said to be named after the sound of the drum, and you’ll hear the crowd chanting “pa-tum, pa-tum!” throughout. During Patum, you must book accommodation at least a month in advance. Good places to stay include Hotel HCC Ciutat de Berga, Pg. de la Industria 11 (938 214 422, hcchotels.es; €60).
Arrival and information: ripoll
By train and bus The train and bus stations are near each other, a 10min walk from the centre of town. Regular trains from Barcelona stop in Ripoll (2hr) en route to Puigcerdà.
Turisme Pl. Abat Oliba, near the monastery (Mon–Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 4–7pm (sometimes 8pm in Aug), Sun 10am–2pm; 972 702 351, ripoll.cat).
Accommodation and eating
Hostal del Ripollès Pl. Nova 11 972 700 215, hostaldelripolles.com. Comfortable if a bit faded – a convenient spot for those who just want to bed down after a day of hiking and cycling. Plus, the family-style restaurant serves hearty local fare (dishes €9–16). €45
La Trobada Pg. Compositor Honorat Vilamanyà 4 972 702 353, latrobadahotel.com. This family hotel is perfectly central – near the monastery, the train and bus stations and the Via Verde. Quiet and simple rooms offer a variety of views, from the Pyrenees to the towering monastery. €65
Sant Joan de les Abadesses
Sitting in the verdant Ríu Tur valley 1km northeast of Ripoll, the petite town of SANT JOAN DE LES ABADESSES was built around the monastery of the same name, which was founded by Guifré el Pélos in 887 and named after his daughter. Sant Joan is a pleasant place for a stroll, particularly through the Pl. Mayor to the Gothic bridge over the Ríu Ter.
The monastery and museum
March–June & Sept–Oct daily 10am–2pm & 4–6pm; July–Aug daily 10am–7pm; Nov–Feb Mon–Fri 10am–2pm, Sat & Sun 10am–2pm & 4–6pm • €3 • albeniz.cat
The twelfth-century monastery features an elegant single-nave church, a Gothic cloister and a thirteenth-century wooden sculpture depicting Christ’s descent from the cross. Also a highlight is the beautiful alabaster Gothic altarpiece of Santa María la Blanca, which dates from the fourteenth century. The Museu de Monestir offers a well-curated overview of the town’s formidable religious history, with sacred artefacts and detailed embroidery and silverware.
Arrival and information: SANT JOAN DE LES ABADESSES
By bus Teisa buses run regularly to Sant Joan de les Abadesses (3–5 times daily, sometimes less often on weekends) on the Girona–Olot–Ripoll route.
Turisme Palau de l’Abadia, next to the Museu del Monestir (Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 720 599, santjoandelesabadesses.cat).
Accommodation
Sant Joan has a couple of welcoming options – or venture into the countryside, where you’ll find a variety of excellent rustic houses.

Hotelet de Sant Joan C/Mestre Andreu 3 872 599 699, hoteletdestjoan.com. A wonderful find in this rustic wedge of Spain, this casual boutique hotel has simple yet stylish rooms, with wood floors, snow-white bed linen and elegant lights. €75
Mas Mitjavila 10km northwest of Sant Joan, in Sant Martí d’Ogassa 972 722 020, masmitjavila.es. Stone farmhouse that was once, along with the adjacent tenth-century church of Sant Martí, a dependency of the Sant Joan monastery. The lovely rooms are the picture of rustic-chic, with lots of gleaming dark wood – from the furnishings to the beamed ceilings – and views of the surrounding green valley. €76
Camprodon
CAMPRODON, 12km east of Sant Joan de les Abadesses, is where you really start to feel like you’re in the mountains: the peaks loom in the distance, the air is crisp and the streets are dotted with ski- and outdoor-gear shops. Camprodon also has an upscale, alpine-holiday air to it, particularly along the broad promenade of Passeig Maristany, where many well-off Catalans have mountain villas. Camprodon’s handsome centrepiece is the sixteenth-century Pont Nou, which spans the Ríu Ter in the middle of town. From here, the main street leads to the lovely Romanesque Sant Pere church, open generally for services only.
Arrival and information: camprodon
By bus Regular Teisa buses from Ripoll stop at a shelter at the southeast edge of town.
Turisme The turisme is on Pl. d’Espanya 1 (Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 740 010, valldecomprodon.org).
Accommodation and eating
Camprodon gets busy in the peak season, when it’s advisable to make reservations. You’ll also find some good accommodation out of town in the Ter valley.

Cal Marques C/Catalunya 11 972 740 434. Feast on local Catalan cuisine at this spacious restaurant, which serves top-notch grilled meats and game – beef, rabbit, duck – as well as seasonal vegetables and well-crafted desserts. Dishes €13–22. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm; occasionally closed Sun or Mon; limited hours in winter.
Hotel Camprodon Pl. Dr Robert 3 972 740 013, hotelcamprodon.com. This well-run hotel, in a modernista building, has a graceful interior and clean if slightly faded rooms. €130
Hotel San Roc Pl. Carme 4 972 740 119, hotelsantroc.com. A family hotel set in the heart of town. Warmly rustic rooms have alpine-style wood ceilings and comfy beds. €70
El Pont 9 Cami Cerdanya 972 740 521, restaurantelpont9.com. Enjoy lovely views of the bridge, and market-fresh Catalan cuisine, from pungent sheep cheeses to cod. The daily menu starts at €17–20. Mon, Tues & Sun 12.30–4pm, Wed & Thurs 12.30–4pm & 8–10pm, Fri & Sat 12.30–4pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Around Camprodon
Beyond Camprodon, appealing mountain villages and trekking trails dot the peaks and Ter valley. This is hiking territory, and many visitors come to this area for outdoor adventure, whether on the trails in summer, or on the slopes of Vallter 2000 in winter. The best way to explore is with your own wheels, though a few buses do crawl through the valley. Villalonga de Ter, 5km from Camprodon, makes for an amiable stopover in your explorations of the valley; it has a Romanesque church, Sant Martí, on the main plaça. Another pleasant stop is the hilltop Tregurá de Dalt, 6km beyond Villalonga, where stone houses line cobbled streets and there are lovely views of the valley and peaks. Both have good accommodation options.
Vallter 2000
vallter2000.com
If you’re looking to ski in the area, try the well-run Vallter 2000, which overlooks the Ter valley and has a decent range of pistes, as well as a variety of offerings for kids, from a good ski school to a Jardí de Neu (snow garden), where the wee ones can play in the snow. The resort also offers plenty of summer activities, from hiking to horseriding.
THE CREMALLERA
The journey of the Cremallera de Vall de Núria, most often just known as the cremallera railway (“zipper” in Catalan), built in 1931, is spectacular: the little train follows the rushing Ríu Freser and then, quite suddenly, begins to scale steep mountainsides along stomach-churning switchbacks, from where you’re rewarded with beautiful views of the river and valley far below. Trains depart from the Ribes-Enllaç station, in the southern part of Ribes, daily year-round except November, when it runs only on the weekends. In high season (July to mid-Sept, plus winter hols), trains run 10–13 times a day; in low season, it’s around 6–7 times. One-way journey time is thirty-five minutes; tickets are €24.80 round-trip in high season. For the latest information, visit valldenuria.cat or call 972 732 020.
Ribes de Freser, Núria and around
The Freser valley extends north of Ripoll to the mountain village of Ribes de Freser and Queralbs before unfolding eastward through a stunning gorge. Ribes de Freser sits at the confluence of three rivers, hemmed in by verdant valleys, and features a small old town and the church of Santa María, which dates back to the eleventh century but was then rebuilt in the 1900s in a modernist style. The village is best known as the starting point for the famous rack-and-pinion cremallera train, which snakes up the mountain to the sanctuary of Núria and its neighbouring ski centre, offering tantalizing views along the way. Ribes de Freser also makes for a pleasant Pyrenean base, thanks to its proximity to the mountains and decent array of accommodation.
Santuari de la Mare de Déu
The Núria valley has long been visited by pilgrims, and the Santuari de la Mare de Déu had its beginnings in a visit by Sant Gil of Nîmes, who came here on retreat in the seventh century. Gil left behind a wooden statue of the Virgin Mary, which became an object of veneration, and eventually a patron saint among local shepherds. The sanctuary consists basically of a parochial church (built in 1911) and a hermitage – a small, ancient-looking mountain church, built in 1615 and refurbished over the years. The overall complex itself is rather plain – it includes the sanctuary, plus several straightforward bars, restaurants and self-catering apartments. Pilgrims still come to visit, and the church holds daily Mass for locals, but the devout are usually outnumbered by skiers in winter and hikers in summer.
Arrival and information: Ribes de Freser, Núria and around
By train Regular trains on the Barcelona–Puigcerdà line stop at the Ribes de Freser (2hr 30min), where you can catch the cremallera train.
Turisme Pl. de l’Ajuntament 3, Ribes de Freser (Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm; 972 727 728, vallderibes.cat).
Activities
Hiking The area abounds with good hikes, including the popular trek along the river gorge from Núria to the village of Queralbs (2hr 30min). Those with more stamina can go on a full-day hike through the Gorges of Freser, trekking on the GR11.7 and then returning on another signposted trail. You can take a break along the way at Refugi Coma de Vaca.
Skiing The Vall de Núria ski centre (valldenuria.cat) has plenty of activities for kids, so is popular with families.
Accommodation and Eating
RIBES DE FRESER
Hotel Resguard dels Vents Cami de Ventaiola, 1km north of town. Stylish little hotel with airy rooms, views of the surrounding quiet mountains and a small, peaceful spa. €90
Hotel Restaurante Els Caçadors C/Balandrau 24–26 972 727 006, hotelsderibes.com. This hotel has good-sized rooms in an earthy colour scheme. The restaurant serves tasty, mid-priced Catalan cuisine with a creative twist – and hearty portions. Daily 2–4pm & 8–11pm. €80
NÚRIA
Albergue Pic de l’Àliga 972 732 048, xanascat.cat. Location is the big draw at this youth hostel, which sits at the top of the cable-car line of the ski centre. Basic dorms, large communal spaces, and they can help arrange outdoor activities. They also have private rooms with bath. Dorms €29.05, doubles €55
GORGES OF FRESER
Refugi Coma de Vaca 972 198 082, comadevaca.com. This well-maintained refuge has bunk-bed dorms, a common room with wooden tables, and mountain views. Staffed Easter and mid-June to mid-September, but call ahead to confirm. €15
The Serra del Cadí
Unfolding in the eastern section of the Western Pyrenees, the verdant Parc Natural Cadí-Moixeró encompasses the massive Serra del Cadí, which has the area’s best hiking and trekking around one of Catalunya’s most recognizable mountains, Pedraforca. The village of Bagà houses the park’s tourist office. The park has a number of staffed refuges, which you can access via treks from the surrounding mountain villages. There are also superb birding opportunities. It’s best to have your own transport, as buses pass only intermittently through the outer villages.
Bagà makes for a good base in the area. It has a tidy little medieval quarter, centred on Pl. Porxada, and a pretty Romanesque-Gothic church. Surrounded by the leafy Gòsol valley, the village of Gòsol, 10km to the west of Saldes (see below), is also a good base. The remains of an eleventh-century castle loom over the village, which is dotted with a few places to stay and a good campsite nearby. Gòsol celebrates its popular annual festival on August 15, with local folk dances, music and cuisine.
PEDRAFORCA: HIKING THE MIGHTY PITCHFORK OF CATALUNYA
Gaze up at Pedraforca, which rises east of Gòsol, and it’s easy to see why it has become one of Catalunya’s most iconic peaks. Its name means “stone pitchfork” because the looming mountain appears cleaved down the middle, resulting in two impressive peaks. The Pedraforca also appears in the coat of arms for Berguedà, the surrounding comarca (region). The mountain is a boon for hikers; most people access it from Saldes, a village at the foot of the mountain. A number of hiking outfits lead treks up Pedraforca, including Pyrenees Trail (pyreneestrals.com), which does a full day-hike, covering 15km and a total ascent of 1000 metres.
Pedraforca is also dotted with a variety of refuges. A ninety-minute trek from Saldes brings you near Refugi Lluís Estasen (1647m; important to reserve ahead in summer), from where you can ascend the 2491m Pedraforca (the full trek up and down takes about 5–6hr). The hike up the mountain reaches the divide between the two summits, where you’ll connect with the path coming up from Gòsol. You’ll find a number of refuges on the mountain; the tourist office in Bagà has up-to-date information on all of them. One popular day-hike from the Refugi Lluís Estasen is to the Refugi Sant Jordi (1570m; staffed generally only in summer) to the east, with the mountain peaks rising up all around you.
REFUGES
Refugi Lluís Estasen 608 315 312. Generally staffed only in summer; call ahead or enquire at park information office. Dorms €15
Refugi Sant Jordi 619 239 860, refugisantjordi.cat. Generally staffed only in summer; call ahead or enquire at park information office. Dorms €15
Arrival and information: the serra del cadí
By bus Alsa buses travel several times daily from Barcelona via Berga to Bagà (2hr 30min); buses drop you off near the centre of Bagà.
Park information office C/la Vinya 1, Bagà (summer Mon–Fri 9am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sat 9am–1.30pm & 4–6.30pm, Sun 9am–1pm; winter Mon–Fri 8am–3pm, Sat 9am–1.30pm & 4–6.30pm, Sun 9am–1pm; 938 244 151, parcsnaturals.gencat.cat). You can pick up maps and a list of refuges here.
Accommodation and eating
Cadí Vacances Southwest of Gòsol, off the road to Tuixént 973 370 143, cadivacances.com. This well-maintained complex has both a camping area and bungalows, as well as a swimming pool, playgrounds and restaurant with fireplace. Camping €25, bungalows €75
Cal Triuet Pl. Major 4, Gòsol 973 370 072. This long-time hotel has decent rooms; they can offer information on hikes into the surrounding mountains. The restaurant serves good mid-priced regional cuisine. Hotel usually closed Dec–Feb. €50
Hotel Ca L’Amagat C/Clota 4, Bagà 938 244 032, hotelcalamagat.com. Near the centre of town, this cosy spot has comfortable rooms and a stone-and-wood-walled restaurant with hearty Catalan cuisine. Mains €15–20. Daily 2–4pm & 8–11pm. €80
Molí del Casó 2km south of Bagà 938 244 076, molidelcaso.es. Welcoming, rustic casa rural with cosy rooms, a vegetable garden and dining room (for guests only) serving regional cuisine. €90
La Cerdanya
The verdant Cerdanya valley, hemmed in by looming peaks to the north and south, has long shared a geo-cultural affinity with France. The border snakes its way through the middle of the valley, but you can hardly tell where Spain ends and France begins. Catalan is spoken on both sides of the border and, in many ways, Cerdanya seems to function as an independent entity, with customs all its own. As the locals say, it’s not quite Spain, and it’s not quite France – it’s simply La Cerdanya. The only Pyrenean valley running east–west, the Cerdanya is showered with more sunlight than any other part of the range, and is therefore a popular summer spot for hikers and mountain bikers. In winter, skiers flock to La Molina and Masella, the two big ski resorts. Puigcerdà, the capital of Cerdanya, is the transport hub for the area, from where you can catch a train that continues into France – the only still-running trans-Pyrenean rail route, and offering lovely views along the way.
Toses
The small village of TOSES, about 18km west of Ribes de Freser, is perched at 1450m. Its highlight is the church of San Cristòfol, dating from the tenth to twelfth century (open usually for services only). The church is modest but well restored, with a handsome nave, rectangular belfry and reproduction frescoes.
La Molina and La Masella
lamolina.com, masella.com
The combined ski resorts of La Molina and La Masella comprise one of the larger ski areas in the Spanish Pyrenees, with pistes on Tosa d’Alp (2537m; 15km south of Puigcerdà) and a total of 101 runs. If you’re new to skiing, try La Molina, which caters to beginners and has a good ski school. La Masella also has a ski school, and offers extensive runs that appeal to more skilled skiers.
Arrival and accommodation: la molina and la masella
By bus It’s easiest to get around with your own transport, though in the ski season there is an intermittent bus from Puigcerdà (generally departing once in the morning to the resort, and twice in the afternoon back to Puigcerdà).
Accommodation
You’ll find a few options in the area. Many skiers, if they have their own transport, opt to stay in Puigcerdà or other villages in the region.

Hotel Adserà La Molina 972 892 001, hoteladsera.com. This alpine hotel has simple but comfortable rooms, an on-site restaurant with regional food and views of the Cerdanya valley. Ask about discounts and packages, which they offer for ski classes and lift passes. €65
SKIING THE CATALAN PYRENEES
There’s a good reason that the Spanish royal family and other luminaries choose to ski in the Catalan Pyrenees – it’s home to some of the best resorts in Spain. As with most ski regions, often the best way to save is through the package deals offered by many hotels, which include discounts on lift tickets. General prices are €14–25 a day for ski gear (skis, boots, poles), and €25–48 daily for lift passes, with prices varying with the length of time you buy passes for, whether it’s a weekday or the weekend, and the quality of the resort. Note, also, that it’s well worth checking ahead to find out the level of snow, especially in the spring.
The Catalan Pyrenees offer a surprising variety of resorts, catering both to first-timers and advanced skiers. Intermediate skiers will find plenty of thrilling terrain at La Masella in La Cerdanya, which now also offers skiing at night on Fridays and Saturdays along 10km on thirteen slopes. Also popular for expert skiers is Boí-Taüll on the western boundary of Aigüestortes and the premiere Baqueira-Beret in the Val d’Aran. The best resorts for newbies and families are Espot Esquí on the eastern boundary of the Parc Nacional de Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici, and La Molina near La Masella.
Puigcerdà
Perched above the breezy union of the rivers Segre and Querol (puig is Catalan for “hill”; cerdà comes from Cerdanya), with the Pyrenees looming grandly above, hilltop PUIGCERDÀ is one of the prettier border towns you’ll come across. With its cluster of budget lodgings and proximity to ski resorts, the town is a busy stopover for skiers, hikers and mountain bikers.
Founded in 1177, Puigcerdà has a rich history, but sadly most of its old buildings were destroyed in the Civil War, and its aged roots are best reflected in the layout and design of its narrow streets and plaças. Among the monuments that were spared is the campanaria (bell tower) in graceful Pl. de Santa Maria, while the well-preserved Pl. Cabrinetty (near Pl. de l’Ajuntament) has beautiful balconies and porticoes.
Church of Sant Domènec and around
Pg. 10 d’Abril • Generally open for services only: daily 8pm, plus Sun mornings and occasional weekday mornings; church opens 1hr before the service
The church of Sant Domènec was built in 1291 and restored after the Civil War. The church features an elegant portal, while inside is a series of fourteenth-century Gothic paintings. Next door sits the convent of Sant Domènec, which now houses a library, a historical archive and sacred artefacts.
Arrival and information: Puigcerdà
By train and bus The train and bus stations sit at the bottom of the hill, from which a free funicular (daily 5.30am–midnight) travels up to Pl. de l’Ajuntament in the middle of town. Several trains daily connect Puigcerdà with Barcelona (3hr), via Vic and Ripoll. Rodalies (local) trains also run 4–5 times daily from Puigcerdà to Latour de Carol in France (10min), from which there are connections to Toulouse (2hr 30min–3hr).
Turisme C/Querol 1, near the Pl. de l’Ajuntament (June to mid-Sept Mon–Fri 9.30am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sat 10am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm; rest of the year closed Sun & Mon; 972 880 542).
Accommodation
Fonda Cerdanya C/Ramon Cosp 7 972 880 010, fondacerdanya.es. This basic fonda has the cheapest beds in town – rooms are simple and a bit faded, but clean, and the friendly owner can fill you in on the area. €60
Hotel del Lago Avda. Dr Piguillem 7 972 881 000, hoteldellago.com. Blessed with a breezy garden, this hotel features alpine-style rooms, and a small spa offering massages and facials. €125
Hotel Villa Paulita Avda. Pons i Gasch 15 972 884 622, hospes.com. This boutique hotel, housed in a nineteenth-century summer villa, has cheery rooms and a good restaurant serving regional cuisine. Hearty breakfast included. €160
Park Hotel Puigcerdà Crtra. Barcelona-Andorra 972 880 750, hotelparkpuigcerda.com. Well-run hotel with spacious rooms, all with balconies and mountain views. Relax at the outdoor pool or at the soothing spa, and top off the day in the restaurant, which has a good menu of Catalan dishes. €160
Torre del Remei Camí del Remei 3, about 5km southwest of Puigcerdà 972 140 182, torredelremei.com. For a taste of the good life in the Catalan Pyrenees, stay at this modernist palace-turned-upscale hotel, surrounded by rolling gardens presided over by sequoias. The eleven rooms and suites are the picture of elegance, including the Suite Royale, with three balconies and sweeping views of La Molina and Masella. The handsome restaurant, helmed by chef/owner Josep Maria Boix, features superb Catalan cuisine, made with vegetables and herbs pulled from the hotel’s gardens. €285
Eating and drinking
Puigcerdà has a range of restaurants, most tending towards homely regional cuisine; take a twirl around Pl. de Santa Maria, which has plenty of eating spots.

El Caliu C/Alfons Primer 1 972 140 825, elcaliu.com. Everything from beef tenderloin to salmon and sardines is served at this inviting spot. Dishes €11–15. Daily 1–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm; sometimes closed Wed.
Taberna del Call Pl. del Call 972 141 036. Fill up on tasty, mid-priced regional food, including grilled fish and meats, at this popular, welcoming taberna, which has a terrace overlooking the plaça. Daily 1–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Tap de Suro C/Querol 21 678 655 928, tapdesuro.com. This lively restaurant features a tasty selection of tapas, from silky slivers of iberico ham to pungent sheep’s cheeses, as well as an excellent line-up of local wines. Tapas and dishes €11–18. Wed–Sun 7–11pm.
Llívia
In 1659, the town of LLÍVIA officially became a Spanish enclave within France, a geographical oddity that has garnered a mention in guidebooks ever since. Though the Spanish ceded 33 villages to France that year, tiny Llívia, deemed a town, remained Spanish. Just 6km from Puigcerdà, it’s easy to reach on foot, or you can take a bus. Either way, Llívia makes for a lovely day-trip, if only to lose yourself in the town’s medieval aura, which becomes increasingly apparent the higher you climb the steep streets.
Mare de Déu dels Àngels
C/dels Forns 13 • Usually daily in summer 10am–1pm & 3–7pm; more limited hours in winter – check with turisme • 972 896 301, llivia.org
This sturdy church, dating from the fifteenth century, features Doric columns and a Baroque retablo. The best time to visit is during the long-running Llívia music festival (since 1982), which is held in and around the church on August weekends, and features orchestras, choirs and sometimes big-name stars (Catalan opera great Montserrat Caballé once performed here).
Museu Municipal
C/dels Forns 12 • Mid-July to Aug daily 10am–8pm; Sept to mid-July Tues–Fri 10am–2pm & 4–6pm, Sat 11am–2pm & 4–8pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €3.50 • 972 896 011, llivia.org
The Museu Municipal, which reopened after renovations in 2012, features sections of what is thought to be the oldest pharmacy in Europe, founded in the early fifteenth century. Look out for the ancient pharmaceutical implements, as well as an impressive collection of Renaissance coffers, with portraits of saints.
arrival and Information: Llívia
By bus Buses leave for Llívia from in front of Puigcerdà’s train station at least twice daily on weekdays, and once daily on weekends.
Turisme C/dels Forns 10 (Mon–Fri 9am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm; shorter hours in winter; 972 896 313, llivia.org).
Accommodation and eating
Can Ventura Pl. Major 4 972 896 178, canventura.com. Can Ventura excels at seasonal Catalan fare that is rooted in local produce. The rustic restaurant, set in a beautifully renovated seventeenth-century townhouse, serves tender roast lamb with Cerdanya pears; cod with wild mushrooms; and foie with apple compote. Top it off with a dessert of crema Catalana along with a brisk Cerdanya white wine. Dishes €8–20. Wed–Sun 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
La Formatgeria de Llívia Pla Ro, Gorguja 972 146 279, laformatgeria.com. This inviting restaurant on the town’s eastern edge is housed in a former cheese factory, and accordingly serves gooey fondues and raclettes, as well as seasonal Catalan cuisine. Mon & Thurs–Sun lunch & dinner; may close in Aug.
Hotel Bernat de So Cereja 5 972 146 206, hotelbernatdeso.com. Just north of town, this handsome hotel is a lovely blend of the rustic and the elegant, with a breezy outdoor garden, a pool and a comfortable living room with a fireplace. €126
Set Terres C/Puigcerdà 8 972 896 499, setterres.com. This beautifully refurbished 1772 farmhouse is now a boutique B&B with seven lovely rooms, filled with natural light and earthy colours, each named after one of the fields in the surrounding Cal Estorc estate. €95
Bellver de Cerdanya
The Pyrenean atmosphere is very evident in the historic village of BELLVER DE CERDANYA, where rustic, slate-roofed chalets line the cobbled streets. About 25km west of Puigcerdà, Bellver overlooks the rushing Ríu Segre; and trout fishing was once a major local industry. The elegant Pl. Major is graced with impressive porticoes, while nearby rises the Gothic church of Sant Jaume. South of town is the twelfth-century Romanesque church of Santa Maria de Talió, presided over by a wooden Virgin.
Arrival and information: Bellver de Cerdanya
By bus Bellver is one of the first stops on the bus route between Puigcerdà (25min) and La Seu d’Urgell (35min).
Turisme Pl. de Sant Roc 9 (mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 11am–1pm & 6–8pm, Sun 11am–1pm; 973 510 229).
La Seu d’Urgell
Known to locals simply as Seu, the pleasant town of LA SEU D’URGELL, capital of the comarca of Alt Urgell, sits amid looming peaks, with Andorra just 10km to the north and the valleys of the rocky Serra del Cadí nearby. As the seat (seu) of the regional archbishopric since the sixth century and home to an outdoor market held continuously since 1029 (on Tues and Sat), Seu has a formidable history, which is revealed in its well-preserved medieval quarter, twisting alleys and imposing Catedral.
The pleasantly mysterious medieval quarter is a small warren of narrow, arcaded streets. Carrer dels Canonges, the oldest street, cuts through its heart, and is lined with centuries-old buildings like Cal Roger, believed to have been a pilgrim’s hostel, and which reveals wooden ceiling beams and some fourteenth-century Gothic carvings (enquire at the turisme about visiting).
Catedral de Santa Maria
Pl. dels Oms • June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1.30pm; mid-Sept to Oct & mid-March to May Mon–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4–6pm, Sun 10am–1.30pm; Nov to mid-March daily 10am–1.30pm • €3, includes cloister and Museu Diocesà
Seu’s twelfth-century Catedral de Santa Maria, just off Pl. dels Oms, is a wonderfully preserved example of Romanesque architecture, with a thirteenth-century cloister which has columns topped with sculpted figures from medieval mythology, and the adjoining eleventh-century chapel of San Miquel. The Museu Diocesà features superbly preserved reliquaries and fragments of the sarcophagus of Bishop Abril Pérez.
Espai Ermengol–Museu de la Ciutat
C/Major 8 • Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sat 10am–2pm, Sun 10am–2pm • Free • 973 353 057, espaiermengol.cat
Next to the Catedral, the small city museum features four floors of exhibits on La Seu’s history. Exhibits include archeological remains, videos and interactive maps and an in-depth look at local products such as the region’s well-known Cadí cheese. On the top floor, you can enjoy lovely views over the rooftops of town.
Arrival and Information: LA SEU D’URGELL
By bus The bus station is on C/Joan Garriga Massó, just north of the old town. Alsina Graells runs buses to Barcelona (3–5 daily; 3hr 30min), Puigcerdà (3 daily; 1hr) and Lleida (1 daily; 2hr 30min).
Turisme Helpful, well-stocked turisme on C/Major 8 (summer Mon–Fri 9am–7pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; rest of year Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 973 351 511, turismeseu.com).
WHITEWATER ADRENALINE RUSH
The Noguera Pallaresa’s mighty flow is legendary, and draws thrill-seekers from around Spain and further afield. The original rafts were primitive – logs lashed together – but could withstand the frothy waters, and were ridden by raiers (rafters) to the sawmills of La Pobla de Segur. These days, the rafts are of the inflatable variety, and exciting whitewater trips are offered by operators throughout the region.
The most popular section of the river is between Llavorsí and Rialp, but tour companies offer a range of trips, each more rugged and scenic than the last. The rafting season is from April to early September; some outfitters also offer rafting programmes in March and October. In season, trips are run daily, usually in the late morning and lasting 1–2 hours on the water. Two-hour trips start at €35, and go up to €70–95 for longer rides, including lunch. The tourist office has a list of recommended rafting operators, including those listed below. Most offer other activities as well:
ACTIVITIES OPERATORS
Rafting Llavorsí Camí de Riberies, Llavorsí 973 622 158, raftingllavorsi.com. This established operator offers rafting, kayaking (€80 for 2 days of instruction; 2hr/day) and multiple other aquatic adventures as well as canyoning (starting at €41 for a beginner course); in the winter, they can arrange snowshoe treks. Daily 9am–8pm.
Roc Roi Pza. Nostra Senyora de Biuse, Llavorsí 973 622 035, rocroi.com. This friendly operator runs a multitude of river sports, including kayak beginner's classes (starting at €25) plus trekking and horseriding. Mid-Oct to Easter daily 9am–9pm.
Rubber River Diputación 14, Sort 973 620 220, rubber-river.com. The town of Sort is filled with rafting and adventure shops, including this reputable outfitter, which offers everything from rafting and canoeing (starting at €50 for a beginner class) to bungee-jumping (€30/jump) and horseriding. Offices open daily 9am–1pm & 5–9pm; closed mid-Oct to April.
Accommodation and eating
Seu has a number of decent hotels scattered about town. If you have your own wheels, try one of the many casas rurales in the area, as most are reasonably priced and have an inviting homespun ambience. The turisme also has a list of recommended country hotels in the area.

Arbeletxe C/Sant Ermengol 22 610 079 782, arbeletxe.com. The Basque Country meets Catalunya at this stylish restaurant that serves a classic menu with contemporary touches, like a fresh salad of black tomatoes with mozzarella and pesto; squid squirted with lemon vinaigrette; succulent duck; and a dessert of tart with apples from the agricultural town of Arfa. Dishes €8–18. Mon & Thurs–Sat noon–2pm & 9–11pm, Sun 9–11pm.
El Castell de Ciutat 1.5km west of La Seu, at the foot of the Castellciutat citadel 973 350 000, hotel-castell-ciutat.com. This luxurious Relais & Châteaux hotel and spa is set in an ancient castle, and features elegant rooms, sumptuous spa treatments and excellent Mediterranean cuisine, which you can enjoy on the breezy terrace overlooking the Urgellet valley. €230
El Menjador C/Major 4 606 922 133, elmenjador.com. This inviting, quirky restaurant, set in a former inn and decorated with flowers and colourful local art, features market-fresh cuisine, including trout from the Ríu Segre, chicken from local farms and cheeses from Cadí’s cooperative. Dishes €11–18. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & dinner (starts at 9pm; reserve ahead); call ahead to check times.
Parador Seu d’Urgell C/Sant Domènec 6 973 352 000, parador.es. This welcoming parador has a blend of old and new – the spacious ground floor incorporates a Romanesque cloister strewn with sofas, while rooms are modern with pale woods. €138
Les Tres Portes Avda. Joan Garriga i Massó 7 973 355 658. Mid-priced grilled meats, such as pork tenderloin with mushrooms, and well-prepared seafood served in a breezy garden. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm.
The Noguera Pallaresa valley
Catalunya’s most famous whitewater-rafting river, the Noguera Pallaresa, churns through the lush valley of the same name. The river has long been an important source of hydroelectric power, and large power plants sit at various points along its banks. The raiers (logger-raftsmen) of La Pobla de Segur used to ride rafts of logs from the Pallars Forest all the way south to the lowlands.
The town of Sort, north of La Pobla de Segur, has become the region’s whitewater-rafting hub, with a host of aquatic-adventure shops. If you’re using public transport, you’ll likely arrive or depart from La Pobla de Segur, which has most of the valley’s connections to and from Barcelona and Lleida.
La Pobla de Segur
The amiable town of LA POBLA DE SEGUR is one of the largest in the Vall de la Noguera, and a good base for river rafting or relaxing amid valley scenery for a few days. You’ll find a decent selection of simple accommodation, plus regular train and bus services.
Arrival and Information: la pobla de segur
By train Regular trains connect La Pobla de Segur with Lleida (1hr 50min) and Barcelona (4hr; via Lleida).
By bus Regular buses run between La Pobla de Segur and Lleida and Barcelona. Buses also head west to El Pont de Suert, Boí and Capdella, where you can access the Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici; as well as north to Sort and Llavorsí, from where you can also access the park.
Turisme Avda. Verdaguer 35, at the north end of town, by the ajuntament (Mon–Sat 9am–2pm; 973 680 257, pobladesegur.cat).
Accommodation and Eating
Fonda Can Frasersia C/Major 4 973 680 245, canfasersia.com. This former boarding house in the middle of the old town is one of several simple fondas, and has a range of economical rooming options, from double rooms with private bath to apartments (from €70). Breakfast included. There’s also a restaurant that serves hearty Catalan meals. Mains €10–20. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm. €52
Hotel Solé Avda. de l’Estació 44 973 680 452, hotelsole.es. Kick back at this straightforward but well-maintained hotel, with ample rooms and bathrooms, and a pool. Apartments are also available. Doubles €66, apartments €88
TREN DELS LLACS
Never underestimate the allure of nostalgia. This historic Tren dels Llacs (Lake Train) is comprised of refurbished old-fashioned steam and diesel locomotives. On its 90km journey between Lleida and La Pobla de Segur, the quaint train chugs over 31 bridges and through 41 tunnels, along cliffs, mountain passes and, of course, lakes. The Tren de Llacs (1hr 50min one way, €30 round trip) operates from April to October, generally only on the weekends or on holidays. You can buy tickets only at the tourist offices in Lleida or in La Pobla de Segur, or La Tienda de FGC in Barcelona on Carrer Pelai. For details, check the website: trendelsllacs.cat.
Gerri de la Sal
Thirteen kilometres north from La Pobla de Segur toward Sort, you’ll come to the petite village of GERRI DE LA SAL, named after the nearby salt mines. Next to the village, an old stone bridge leads to the beautiful twelfth-century Monasterio de Sant Maria. Though it’s closed to the public, the area around it is lovely for a wander. Just beyond Gerri de la Sal is a tunnel, alongside which the old road hugs the rocky side of the mountain and is open to hikers and bikers.
Museum de Gerri de la Sal
Pza. Àngel Esteve • Summer Tues–Sun 11am–2pm & 5.30–7.30pm; rest of year, open by reservation • Free • 973 662 040, mnactec.cat
This small but growing museum explores the history of salt mining in Gerri de la Sal, an industry that dates back to the ninth century. The museum, which forms part of the European Route of Industrial Heritage, features photos, tools and implements and a video that traces the evolution of salt in Gerri de la Sal, from the salt springs to the advent of salt mines to transport – salt was carried by mules to be grinded and packed into sacks.
Sort
The capital of the comarca of Upper Pallars, SORT is a pleasant mix of old and new, with an ancient core and modern facilities catering to the outdoor adventurers who descend in the spring and summer. Every year in early July, the town hosts the Raiers (Rafters) Festival, celebrating the log-rafters of the past.
Arrival and information: sort
By bus One Alsina Graells bus departs Barcelona daily for Sort, Rialp, Llavorsí and Esterri d’Àneu. Buses stop at a shelter north of town.
Turisme Camí de la Cabanera (July & Aug Mon–Fri 9am–8pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 3–8pm, Sun 10am–1pm; Sept–June Mon–Thurs 9am–3pm, Fri 9am–3pm & 4–6.30pm, Sat 10am–2.30pm; 973 621 002, pallarssobira.cat).
eating
El Fogony Avda. Generalitat 45 973 621 225, fogony.com. This is a wonderful surprise in Sort: a handsome restaurant, run by a husband-and-wife team, that serves superlative Catalan cuisine that’s locally sourced, including pig trotters with mushrooms, truffles and bacon, and rabbit with tomato allioli. Dishes €20–30; menu starts at €35. Generally Wed–Sat 1–4pm & 8–10pm, Sun 1–4pm.
Rialp and Port-Ainé
Tiny RIALP, which lies just 3km north of Sort, is an atmospheric jumble of old houses and new chalets. Port-Ainé (granpallars.com), 15km northeast of Rialp, features good beginner and intermediate skiing on its thirty-plus runs, and also has a dedicated children’s slope. Snow conditions are generally top-notch, even in the spring.
Accommodation: Rialp and port-ainé
RV Hotel Condes del Pallars Avda. Flora Cadena 2, Rialp 973 620 626, hotelcondesdelpallars.com. This long-running resort-style hotel is a favourite with families. It can be a bit faded in places, but it serves its purpose as a place to base yourself for winter sports, with plenty of amenities, including a restaurant (guests only), a small gym and a kids’ activity centre. Rate includes breakfast. €79
Llavorsí
A rugged mountain landscape surrounds the riverside LLAVORSÍ, 10km north of Rialp. With an attractive mix of stone houses, modern accommodation and established outdoor operators, the town makes for a good base. Sports operators offer a wide range of activities, including rafting, mountain biking, canyoning and rock climbing. Regular buses run from Barcelona to Llavorsí (5hr 30min) via Sort and Rialp.
Accommodation AND Eating: Llavorsí
Aigües Braves 1km north of Llavorsí 973 622 153, campingaiguesbraves.com. This campsite has a variety of facilities, including pool, bar and arranged activities. They also offer weekend deals in wooden bungalows (€70). Closed Oct–April. €20
Hotel del Rei Avda. Pallaresa 10  973 622 011, hotelderei.com. This well-run hotel has an array of comfortable rooms, from doubles to triples to sizeable family rooms, many of which have views of the mountains. The restaurant serves up good breakfasts and Catalan dinners. €66
Hotel Riberies Camí de Riberies 973 622 051, riberies.com. This hotel features alpine-style rooms, a small spa with Jacuzzi and a good restaurant serving regional cuisine, from river trout to duck with pears. Breakfast included. Mains €15–20. €95
Vall d’Àneu and Esterri d’Àneu
The Vall d’Àneu stretches north of Llavorsí, sitting at the head of the Noguera Pallaresa river. The rugged valley is well placed for access to the region’s great outdoors, from hiking in the Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici to skiing at the Espot resort to the west and Baqueira-Beret to the north. The Vall d’Àneu is made up of a smattering of villages and towns, most comprising a mix of modern chalets catering to the ski crowd and traditional homes and restaurants.
Esterri d’Àneu
Once a rustic mountain community, Esterri d’Àneu is now angled as an alpine resort, with both contemporary apartment buildings and hotels. It has a well-restored old town, over which rises the elegant Sant Vicenç church. A lovely Romanesque bridge, dating to the early thirteenth century, arches over the river, along whose banks you can walk and take in the surrounding mountain scenery.
Arrival and information: Esterri d’Àneu
By bus Regular buses travel between Esterri d’Àneu and Barcelona (5hr 30min) and Lleida (3hr).
Turisme C/Major 62 (summer Mon 10am–1.45pm, Tues–Sun 10am–1.45pm & 4–8.20pm; rest of year usually Sat & Sun only; 973 626 345, vallsdaneu.org). Has information on the valley and outdoor activities.
Accommodation and Eating
Hotel Apartamentos Trainera C/Major 54 973 626 521, hoteltrainera.com. Amenity-filled hotel with clean rooms and apartments (from €120). Relax at the spa (which offers massages and other treatments) or check out the games room. The on-site restaurant serves decent fixed-price lunch and dinner menus (€16–27). €90
Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici
gencat.cat/parcs/aiguestortes
One of nine in Spain, Catalunya’s largest national park, the Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici, encompasses soaring peaks topping 3000m and lush meadows irrigated by more than four hundred lakes, streams, waterfalls and impressive glacial valleys. Established in 1955, the park is comprised of valleys blanketed in pine and fir forests, while wild animals like the isard, a small antelope also known as the chamois, roam the terrain. You might even spot a golden eagle or black woodpecker, both common here.
Hiking and trekking opportunities abound, from easy walks around sparkling lakes to serious treks up the mountain. The Sant Nicolas valley in the west features numerous glacial lakes, as well as the meanders of Aigüestortes (Twisted Waters). In the east lies the massive Estany de Sant Maurici (Sant Maurici Lake), at the head of the Escrita valley. In the winter, you can also cross-country ski through the park, though there are no marked trails.
The park’s western sector is best reached from the Vall de Boí – to explore Aigüestortes, the approach is generally from Boí via El Pont de Suert; the eastern portion, including Lake Sant Maurici, is accessed via Espot, which lies just beyond the eastern border of the park. The easiest starting point for the higher mountains is Capdella, south of the park. If you’ll be hiking for several days at a time between June and September, you can stay at any of the refuges throughout the park. Either visitor centre can give you a list.
arrival and information: Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici
By car and taxi Private cars are not allowed in the park, but 4WD taxis travel from the main square in Boí to the information booth at the entrance; taxis operate July to Sept 15 (8am or 9am–7pm) and rest of the year (9am–6pm) from €6 one-way. The closest you can get to the park in your car is La Molina car park, near the boundary. When this fills up, try the La Farga car park, about 1.5km east. You can arrange for a 4WD taxi to take you from either car park further uphill. When you arrive at the park entrance from Boí (3.5km) it’s then about another 3.5km to the crashing waterfalls of Aigüestortes. It’s important to keep track of the weather, as it can greatly affect accessibility. In the cold season, it can be difficult to access certain roads.
Visitor centres There are park information booths at the entrance and also above the waterfalls (both generally open July–Sept daily 9.30am–2pm & 4–7pm). You can also pick up trail guides and park maps at the visitor centres in Boí and Espot.
Maps Editorial Alpina (editorialalpina.com) has excellent, detailed topographical maps of the park.
Entrance Entry to the park is free.
Safety It’s always a good idea to alert the refuge staff before you set out on treks, any time of year.
Accommodation
Refuges Accommodation in and around the park encompasses around twenty refuges, both in the park and in the park’s peripheral zone. The refuges usually open in the summer (when most are staffed), Easter and sometimes Christmas, as well as on selected weekends and school holidays during the rest of the year. Refuges are usually equipped with bunk beds and have a basic meal service. Prices generally range between €17 and €40/person. Most refuges are fully booked during July and August, so you’ll need to reserve ahead, which you can do via lacentralderefugis.com or by calling 973 641 681.
Camping Camping in the park is officially forbidden, though you can camp in the peripheral zone.
HIKES AND RIDES FROM CAPDELLA
There are a number of popular treks from Capdella, including the half-day hike to the inviting Refugi Colomina, set amid mountain lakes. You’ll find various treks around the Refugi Colomina, including to Estany Llong, by way of Estany Tort. You can also access the park on the teleférico (cable car; July–Sept; around 9 departures daily, 8am–6pm; €18 round trip). The cable car travels from the Saliente reservoir (about 7km north of Capdella) to the Estany Gento, which is near an entrance of the park – on its fifteen-minute trip, the cable car climbs 450m. It was originally constructed in 1981 to transport materials and workers while the Saliente power station was being built, and it’s said to be one of the cable cars with the greatest transport capacities in Europe; it was opened to the public in 1991.
Vall de Fosca
The verdant Vall de Fosca, which extends just south of the park, received its name Fosca (“dark”) because it’s surrounded by steep slopes that obscure the sun. Tiny Capdella is perched at its northernmost point and, at 1420m, is the highest of the fifteen or so tiny villages and settlements that are sprinkled south through the valley, including Espui and La Torre de Capdella. Capdella makes for a good jumping-off point into the park, and is the village closest to the teleférico.
Arrival and information: vall de fosca
By bus Buses travel from La Pobla de Segur to Capdella (30min).
Turisme The Vall de Fosca turisme is in the ajuntament of Torre de Capdella on the Pl. Major (daily Mon–Fri 9am–3pm, Mon & Thurs also 4.30–8.30pm; 973 663 001, vallfosca.net), 4km south of Espui.
Espot, Espot Esquí and around
ESPOT is a cosy mountain town hemmed in by a lovely green valley, which has increasingly been built up as a tourist centre. In the winter, skiers pass through on their way to Espot Esquí (granpallars.com), just south of town, which has nearly thirty alpine trails.
You can access the park from Espot, which lies about 7km from the Estany de Sant Maurici. Upon arrival at the estany (lake), you’ll want to get your camera out: it’s a beautiful scene, the lake fringed by wilderness and dominated by the spires of Els Encants (“The Enchanted Ones”; 2700m).
Arrival and information: Espot, Espot Esquí and around
By bus and taxi The daily buses from Barcelona, Lleida and La Pobla de Segur to Esterri d’Àneu stop at the Espot turn-off. From there, it’s a steep 8km uphill walk to Espot, and then another similar distance to get to the park.
By taxi The quickest and easiest way to the park is by taxi, which travel from Espot to Estany de Sant Maurici. Taxis generally depart from the park information offices (July–Sept 8am–6pm or 7pm, rest of year 9am–6pm; from around €7 one-way).
Casa del Parc information office C/Sant Maurici 5, at the edge of Espot (June–Sept daily 9am–1pm & 3.30–6.45pm; Oct–May Mon–Sat 9am–2pm & 3.30–5.45pm, Sun 9am–2pm; 973 624 036). Has maps of the park and up-to-date weather reports.
Accommodation and Eating
Camping La Mola Carretera Estany de Sant Maurici, 3km east of Espot 973 624 024, campinglamola.com. Located outside of Espot, this quality campsite features an excellent range of amenities, including a pool, tennis court, games room, bar and a small supermarket. They also have bungalows. Open Easter & July–Sept. €20, bungalows (for four people) €150
Casa Felip C/Felip 973 624 093, casafelip.com. Located in the middle of Espot, this long-established place has comfortable rooms, a small front garden and a storage area for skis and bikes. They can also help arrange outdoor activities, in summer and winter. €55
Cal Juquim Pl. Sant Martí 1 973 624 009. This popular restaurant in the centre of Espot, serves filling mountain fare, including grilled meats, from lamb and wild boar to juicy sausages (€9–15). Generally daily 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm; sometimes closes for part of winter.
POPULAR HIKES AND REFUGES
One of the most popular (though challenging in parts) hikes is to traverse the park from east to west, starting at the Estany de Sant Maurici. The full trek, all the way to Boí, takes about 9–10 hours, but you can shorten it by hopping in a taxi for the last part from the park entrance to Boí. Roughly halfway along it sits the Refugi de Estany Llong.
The northern section of the park offers a wealth of treks for the adventurous and well-equipped – the Espot park information office has detailed maps of trails – as well as refuges, including the top-notch Refugi de Colomèrs, the Refugi de Restanca and the Ventosa i Calvell, near Estany Negre.
Another good hike from the east is to Refugi Josep Maria Blanc, which lies southwest of Espot and is surrounded by lush valleys. The hike from Espot to the refuge takes 3–4 hours. From here, the hike continues to the Colomina refuge, which you can reach in another 3–4 hours.
REFUGES
The refuges are all very similar – usually sturdy, stone houses with simple rooms and basic beds.
Refugi de Colomèrs 973 253 008, refugicolomers.com. Daily Easter & mid-June to late Sept, weekends Feb & March. €18
Refugi Colomina 973 252 000, lacentralderefugis.com. Early Feb, mid-March to mid-April & mid-June to mid-Sept; call ahead to confirm. €16.50
Refugi de Estany Llong 973 299 545, lacentralderefugis.com. Late Feb, Easter & June to mid-Oct. From €13
Refugi Josep Maria Blanc 973 250 108, jmblanc.com. Late May to mid-Oct. Breakfast included. €26
Refugi de Restanca 608 035 559, restanca.com. Weekends most of the year, plus daily Easter week & mid-June to late Sept. €18
Refugi Ventosa i Calvell 873 297 090, refugiventosa.com. Mid-June to late Sept & some winter weekends. Breakfast included. €26
Vall de Boí
Extending just west of the national park is the lush Vall de Boí, anchored by the mountain village of Boí. The highlights of the valley are its lovely Romanesque churches, the most remarkable of their kind in Catalunya. In 2000, the churches were designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO, who described them as “an especially pure and consistent example of Romanesque art in a virtually untouched rural setting”. And it is this setting that leaves the lasting impression – the beautiful simplicity of the early Romanesque architecture is magnified by the utter alpine stillness surrounding them. The churches, all built between the eleventh and fourteenth centuries, were constructed of local materials, like stone, slate and wood – and their most striking features are their elegant belfries which, in the case of Taüll, rises an impressive six storeys. Note that many of the church frescoes are reproductions – though excellent ones, to be sure – because the originals have been moved to MNAC in Barcelona. In addition to the valley’s two finest churches in Taüll, other Romanesque beauties worth a visit are Sant Feliu in Barruera, Nativitat in Durro and Santa Eulàlia in Erill la Vall.
Boí
The pleasant town of BOÍ serves as a good starting point for exploring the surrounding region, both for the Romanesque churches – you can walk a variety of signposted trails from Boí to neighbouring churches – and also the national park, an entrance to which lies 3.5km from town. Boí also has a helpful park information office, and its own Romanesque church, the twelfth-century Sant Joan: parts of the original belfry are still intact, and the church has three naves. As with other churches in the area, the frescoes are reproductions but nonetheless eye-catching, and include images of mythical animals.
Estany de Cavallers
Five kilometres north of Boí is the Estany de Cavallers (Cavallers Lake), where you can pick up trails towards the lake-filled landscape in the northwest section of the park, which are presided over by the Besiberri and Montrarto peaks. A good refuge in the northwest of the park is Ventosa i Calvell.
Taüll
TAÜLL, 3km east of Boí, is home to two of the valley’s best-known Romanesque churches. Sant Climent, consecrated in 1123, features an exquisite six-storey square belfry that rises gracefully above the town. The church’s emblematic Romanesque murals were created by the so-called Master of Taüll, and transferred to Barcelona in 1922. Particularly striking is the image of Christ Pantocrator (Christ in Majesty) in the apse. Taüll’s second Romanesque icon is the church of Santa Maria, with its four-storey belfry.
Boí-Taüll
902 406 640, boitaullresort.es
The valley is also home to a ski centre, Boí-Taüll, which lies 11km southeast of Taüll. The resort has nearly fifty pistes and lifts that reach up to 2750m, and covers an area of about 45km. They offer an array of classes for beginners, and a good family ski programme. Call ahead, as the resort may be undergoing some changes and may therefore have limited hours.
ROMANESQUE CHURCHES IN THE VALL DE BOÍ
Pick up information on all the Romanesque churches at the Centre d’Interpretació del Romànic, on C/Batalló in Erill la Vall (Daily 9am–2pm & 5–7pm; 973 696 715, vallboi.cat/en/romanesque-centre), in the centre of the valley. All churches have the same general hours: July to early Sept daily 10am–2pm & 4–8pm; rest of the year daily 10am–2pm & 4–7pm. Individual churches are €2 (Sant Climent de Taüll is €5), or €7 for a combined ticket to three churches, €8 for three churches and access to the centre, €10 for five churches and the centre and €15 for three churches and access to MNAC in Barcelona; Santa Maria de Taüll is free.
Arrival and information: vall de Boí
By bus Buses from Barcelona to La Pobla de Segur run up to three times daily throughout the year. From July to mid-September, a connecting bus travels from La Pobla de Segur to El Pont de Suert and from there to Barruera and the Boí turn-off, about 1km before Boí.
Park information office C/les Graieres 2, Boí (July & Aug daily 9am–2pm & 3.30–6pm; rest of year closed Sun afternoon; 973 696 189, oapn.es). Has route information, maps and a list of the refuges in the park. There are also information booths both at the park entrance and above the Aigüestortes waterfalls.
Accommodation and Eating
BOÍ
Hotel Pey Pl. Treio 3 973 696 036, hotelpey.com. This welcoming, family-run hotel has a range of accommodation, including alpine, wood-panelled rooms and fully equipped apartments (for two to three people). They also have a friendly restaurant, where you can refuel over thick stews and grilled meats, from rabbit to beef. Mains €15–20. Daily 2–4pm & 8–11pm. Doubles €76, apartments €80
CALDES DE BOÍ
Caldes de Boí 5km north of Boí 973 696 201, caldesdeboi.com. If you’d like some pampering, head to this lovely spot, considered one of the best spas in the Spanish Pyrenees; it has a wide range of treatments, from natural springs to massages, and several accompanying hotels, including Manantiel, which is comfortable and well maintained. Usually closed Jan–March. Manantiel €120
TAÜLL
Hostal Santa Maria Cap del Riu 3 973 696 170, taull.com. This beautifully renovated house features cosy, wood-beamed rooms, a dining room with a fireplace, and a breezy garden. €110
Hotel el Rantiner C/Trestaüll 5 973 696 184, hotelelrantiner.com. This wonderfully cosy mountain hotel features ample rooms rustically done up with wood floors and sturdy furniture. Wake up to mountain views and a hearty breakfast, included in the price. €115
El Xalet de Taüll C/El Como 5 973 696 095, elxaletdetaull.com. This inviting chalet has wood-panelled rooms, mountain views and a summer garden. May be closed for part of winter so call ahead. €115
Val d’Aran
Nudging the French border in the far northwest of the Catalan Pyrenees, the lush Val d’Aran has long been geographically and culturally distinct from the rest of the Pyrenees. You can see the disparity of its architecture – French-style chalets dot the mountains – and you can hear it on the streets: the language here is Aranés, a mix of Gascon French and Catalan. The valley drains towards the Atlantic and splits into the Garonne River, whose waters eventually feed the vineyards of Bordeaux.
The Val d’Aran joined Catalunya-Aragón in the twelfth century and was fully given over to Catalunya in 1389. Completely ringed by high peaks, however – some reaching over 3000m – it has always been difficult to access. For most of the valley’s history, the only routes in from the Spanish side crossed the tricky Bonaigua or Bossòst passes, both accessible only in summer. This changed only in 1948, when the first Vielha Tunnel opened on the N230 highway.
The valley’s capital and commercial centre is Vielha, a beautiful alpine town with one foot in the past and the other in the very contemporary present, as a luxury resort. In winter, the Val d’Aran becomes upscale skiing country, drawing folks from all over Spain and France. While the area still reveals pockets of traditional life, it has undergone a massive shift in the last several decades, with upmarket apartments replacing family dwellings, and much of the retail catering to slick skiers. The Spanish royal family, along with the fit and fabulous, frequent Baqueira-Beret, one of Spain’s premier ski resorts.
The Val d’Aran is divided into three sectors: Vielha e Mijaran (Middle Aran), Baish Aran (Lower Aran; northwest of Vielha near the French border) and Nau Aran (Upper Aran; east of Vielha). Both Upper and Lower Aran are ripe for exploration, each of their mountain villages more lovely than the last. You’ll find plenty of hiking and trekking opportunities – trails meander all over the valley. You could easily spend a day or two hiking from one tiny village to the next, enjoying a country meal at one, and bedding down in a rustic farmhouse in the next. Salardú and Arties make for pleasant stopovers in Nau Aran.
GO WILD
The Val d’Aran has long drawn the crowds for its alpine activities. These days, it’s also drawing crowds for its alpine animals. Wildlife-watching has been growing in popularity in the Val d’Aran, with the tourist office (see above) expanding its wildlife coverage, and with tour companies, such as WildWatching Spain (wildwatchingspain.com) and Aran Experience (aranexperience.com), offering a variety of wildlife treks, including springtime photo treks and summer birding. Among the animals you might spot are, in spring and summer, the Pyrenean capercaillie, black woodpecker, brown bear, bearded vulture and marmot; and in winter, the spotted woodpecker, mountain passerines and golden eagle. The wildlife park Aran Park in Bossòst (April–June & Sept–Oct daily 9.30am–6pm, July–Aug daily 9.30am–7pm; €14;. aran-park.es) features a wide range of animals in a natural setting, including deer and bears; in 2017, the park introduced more wild animals, including grey wolves.
Vielha
The valley centres on the bustling town of VIELHA, which goes through a metamorphosis in winter: when the snow descends, so too do the slickly outfitted skiers, who crowd the slopes, gear shops and restaurants. After the snow melts, Vielha reverts to its small-town self, when the hilly streets get quiet, and the bars are again the domain of the locals. The tiny old quarter features the parish church of Sant Miquèu, with a twelfth-century wooden Crist de Mijaran, a superb example of Romanesque art.
Museu dera Val d’Aran
C/Major 26 • Tues & Thurs–Sat 10am–7pm, Wed 10am–8pm, Sun 10am–2.30pm • €4.50
The small Museu dera Val d’Aran, housed in a seventeenth-century building in the old town, features an overview of Aranese history, folklore and ethnology, from prehistoric times to today, including exhibits of old photographs, period furnishings and more.
Arrival and information: vielha
By bus A couple of Alsina Graells buses travel daily between Barcelona and Vielha (5hr 30min), via Lleida and El Pont de Suert. From June to September, one to two daily buses also run from Barcelona to Vielha via La Pobla de Segur, Llavorsí and Salardú.
Turisme C/Sarriulera 6 (daily 9am–9pm; 973 640 110, visitvaldaran.com). This office has up-to-date lists of accommodation in the valley.
Accommodation
Hotel El Ciervo Pl. de San Orenç 3 973 640 165, hotelelciervo.net. This cheerful, family-run hotel has well-maintained rooms, each individually decorated, and an excellent breakfast buffet with local specialities and fresh-brewed coffee. Closed June & Nov. €120
Parador de Vielha Carretera del Túnel 973 640 100, parador.es. The draw at this modern parador is the lovely view of the mountain peaks. The granite building is very contemporary-looking – no historic charm here – but the rooms are warmly done up in the trademark parador style, with wooden furniture. €120
Tryp Vielha Baqueria Aneto de Vielha 973 638 000, melia.com. Wake up to views of the Pyrenees from this well-run hotel, with spacious rooms, as well as pool, sauna and spa. The restaurant offers buffet breakfasts and dinners, or enjoy a cocktail on the bar’s outdoor terrace. €110
Eating and Drinking
Casa Turnay 2km east, in the village of Escunhau 973 640 292. Rustic, stone-walled Aranese restaurant with hearty local food, from grilled rabbit to trout fished from local rivers to butifarra negra (Catalan sausage). Dishes €10–15. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8–11pm.
Era Coquela Avda. Garona 29 973 642 915, eracoquela.com. This deservedly popular restaurant serves hearty, lovingly prepared local cuisine in a cosy dining room, from suckling pig and grilled fish with romesco sauce to duck with cassis sauce and pear tart with ice cream. The menu, starting at €14, is an excellent deal, and sometimes includes a bottle of wine for two. Dishes €8–18. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8–11pm.
Eth Cornèr C/Sant Nicolau 2 973 641 623, ethcorner.com. After a day on the slopes, there’s no better spot to fill up on hearty tapas and wine than this long-time local’s favourite. Try the grilled ceps (mushrooms), potatoes with fried egg, and bread and rabbit with allioli. Mon–Sat 7.30am–11.30pm.
Saxo Blu C/Marrec 6 saxoblu.com. Long-running, amiable bar with cocktails and occasional live music. Daily 7pm–2.30am.
Baqueira-Beret
973 639 010, baqueira.es
The massive Baqueira-Beret ski resort has more development than any other in the area and imbues the valley with a stylish sheen. It’s one of Spain’s choicest resorts, and has the crowd to match. Discerning skiers, most famously Spain’s king himself, flock to its 70-plus pistes, which cover up to 105km – making it one of Spain’s largest resorts. The resort amenities – groomed pistes, numerous chairlifts, a top-notch ski staff – rival the Pyrenean scenery of frosted peaks piercing the bright-blue sky. If you don’t want to go for the pricey resort accommodation, do what many do: stay for considerably less at a nearby village, such as Salardú or Vielha.
Salardú
The Val d’Aran contains over thirty hillside villages, most with their own Romanesque church. SALARDÚ, which lies just west of Baqueira-Beret, is one of the valley’s larger settlements, with the thirteenth-century church of Sant Andreu (open for services; enquire at turisme about other times) standing tall in its centre. Take a look at the detailed portal and, inside, the carefully restored frescoes.
Salardú has a decent tourist infrastructure – several options for lodging and food – but also a rugged alpine personality. Call ahead to your hotel in the non-snow season, as they sometimes close.
Arrival and information: Salardú
By bus From June to Sept, one daily service runs from Barcelona to Vielha via La Pobla de Segur, Llavorsí and Salardú (about 5hr 30min).
Turisme C/des Estudis (daily 9am–1pm & 4–7pm, off-season hours may be limited; 973 645 197, visitvaldaran.com).
Accommodation and eating
Albergue Era Garona Carretera de Vielha 973 645 271, tojuaran.com. Basic but fairly spacious youth hostel in a stone-and-slate building. Rooms, which have up to four beds, come with either private or shared bathroom. €34.50
Hotel Deth Pais Pl. Dera Pica 973 645 836, hoteldethpais.com. This small, comfortable, slate-roofed hotel in the village centre has clean rooms with balconies. Buffet breakfast included in the price, and they can help arrange outdoor activities in the surrounding mountains. €70
Hotel Mauberme Carretera Bagergue 3 972 645 517, hotelmauberme.com. Small, home-away-from-home hotel with wonderfully cosy rooms with slanted wood ceilings, a charming sitting room with fireplace and an included hearty buffet breakfast. €120
Prat Aloy Dera Mola 973 644 179. This place serves meaty dishes, like grilled steak, lamb and sausages. Main dishes €17–25. Daily 1–4pm & 9–11pm; usually closed March, Oct & Nov.
Refugi Rosta Pl. Major 1 973 645 308. Comfortable if faded refuge in a three-hundred-year-old building on the main plaça, catering to trekkers and skiers on a budget. It also doubles as the PyrenMuseum, which features old photographs and maps of the region. Refugi Rosta also runs PyrenHab (pyrenhab.com), a casa rural just to the west of Salardú, which is ideal for groups (from €290 for a weekend). The Refugi is sometimes closed March, Oct and Nov. €30
Arties
ARTIES, 3km west of Salardú, offers a charming mix of Pyrenean history and the chance to join the locals in dining (and drinking) out. Its old town is pleasant for a stroll, featuring the signature slate-roof houses of the valley, and you can take in the Romanesque-Gothic Santa Maria (open for services), which has a barrel-vaulted nave and a five-storey belfry.
Accommodation and eating: arties
Casa Irene C/Major 3 973 644 364, hotelcasairene.com. This well-regarded restaurant serves mountain cuisine, from grilled rabbit to thick Aranese stews; prices range from €17 to €27 for mains. They also have an adjoining hotel, with elegant, individually decorated wood-floored rooms. Restaurant generally open daily 2–4pm & 8–11pm; closed in winter. €105
Casa Rufus C/Sant Jaume 8, in Gessa, 1.5km east of Arties 973 645 246. When it comes to alpine cuisine, this place looks the part: a stone facade gives way to a warmly wood-panelled dining room. This is food made for trekking the mountains: big bowls of steaming Aranese stew, grilled beefs, sausages and the ubiquitous but excellent cod. Tapas and dishes €7–19. Hours vary but usually Mon–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8–11pm.
Eth Restilhè Pl. Carrera 2, in Garos, 2km west of Arties 873 641 539, restilhe.com. Fill up on mountain cuisine, from the exquisite house pâté to grilled sausages to trout with herbs, at this long-running family restaurant. Mains €12–22. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm; limited hours in winter.
Tauèrnes Urtau Pl. Urtau 12 972 640 926, urtau.com. There’s a good reason that this local tapas chain pulls in the crowds. The diverse menu is flavourful, filling and fun, including a huge array of tapas and pintxos, from croquettes to grilled shrimp. Tapas €7–15. Other locations are in Vielha and Bossòst. Daily 8am–midnight.
Bossòst
An enticing blend of history, alpine beauty and local cuisine, the village of BOSSÒST lies roughly equidistant to Vielha (15km to the southeast) and the French border, just to the north. Bossòst’s Romanesque highlight is the beautiful twelfth-century church, crowned by a well-preserved bell tower, and with apses designed in the Lombard (early Romanesque) style. Bossòst is near the gorgeous Portilhon mountain pass – accessible via driving and hiking – which reveals one of the finest viewpoints in the area: Còth de Baretja, looking out over the majestic Val D’Aran.
Arrival and information: BosSòst
By bus From June to Sept, a bus runs regularly in the valley, connecting Bossòst and Vielha (20min); in winter, the bus runs on a reduced schedule, if at all.
eating
Er Occitan C/Major 66 973 647 366, eroccitan.com. Sample the best of Catalan alpine “slow food” cuisine at this elegantly rustic restaurant, with stone walls and white bed linen. Among the dishes are elderflower tempura; suckling pig with four types of garlic; lamb with potatoes stuffed with goat's cheese and bacon; and a dessert rooted in a traditional Val d’Aran mulled wine. For the finest sampling, go for the tasting menu (from €49) or the “surprise menu” (from €49), selected by the chef. Mon & Tues–Thurs 12.30–3.30pm, Fri & Sat 12.30–3.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm.
El Portalet C/Sant Jaume 32 973 648 200, restaurantportalet.com. The mountain landscape doesn’t just unfold outside of this charming restaurant, but inside too. The dining room reflects the earthy colours of the surrounding valley, incorporating elements of nature like tree trunks and branches. The hyper-seasonal menu also reflects the local environment, with dishes like lamb with sweetbreads and cucumber tartare; suckling pig with maple syrup; and monkfish with black sausage. Dishes €15–25. Tues–Thurs & Sun 12.30–3pm, Fri & Sat 12.30–3pm & 8.30–10pm.
< Back to Catalunya
Southern Catalunya
The great triangle of land south of Barcelona may be one of the lesser-visited wedges of Catalunya – but it shouldn’t be. This wonderfully varied area encompasses a sun-speckled coast, a trinity of medieval monasteries and the historically rich provincial capitals of Tarragona and Lleida.
West of Barcelona lies cava country, where you can tour Catalunya’s best-known cava producers, especially around Sant Sadurní d’Anoia. On the coast, just south of Barcelona, sits vibrant Sitges, a major gay summer destination that’s also home to some fine modernista architecture. Beyond this is the Costa Daurada – the coastline that stretches from just north of Tarragona to the Delta de l’Ebre – which suffered less exploitation than the Costa Brava. It’s easy enough to see why it was so neglected – the shoreline can be drab, with beaches that are narrow and characterless, backed by sparse villages – but there are exceptions, and if all you want to do is relax by a beach for a while, there are several down-to-earth and perfectly functional possibilities.
The Costa Daurada really begins to pay dividends, however, if you can forget about the beaches temporarily and spend a couple of days in Tarragona. It’s a city with a solid Roman past – reflected in an array of impressive ruins and monuments – and makes a handy springboard for trips inland into Lleida province. South of Tarragona, Catalunya peters out in the lagoons and marshes of the Delta de l’Ebre, a riverine wetland rich in birdlife – perfect for slow boat trips, fishing and sampling the local seafood.
Inland attractions are fewer, and many travelling this way are inclined to head on out of Catalunya altogether, not stopping until they reach Zaragoza. It’s true that much of the region is flat, rural and dull, but nonetheless it would be a mistake to miss the outstanding monastery at Poblet, only an hour or so inland from Tarragona. A couple of other nearby towns and monasteries – notably medieval Montblanc and Santes Creus – add a bit more interest to the region, while by the time you’ve rattled across the huge plain that encircles the provincial capital of Lleida you’ll have earned a night’s rest. Pretty much off the tourist trail, Lleida is the start of the dramatic road and train routes into the western foothills of the Catalan Pyrenees, and is only two and a half hours from Zaragoza.
Vilafranca del Penedès
Pleasant VILAFRANCA DEL PENEDÈS, capital of the comarca of Alt Penedès, lies about 45km southwest of Barcelona, and offers the twin pleasures of history and wine. It was founded in the eleventh century in an attempt to attract settlers to land retaken from the expelled Moors and in time became a prosperous market centre. This character is still in evidence today, with a compact old town with narrow streets and arcaded squares adorned with restored medieval mansions. In the centre, around Pl. de Sant Joan, a Saturday market sells everything from farm-fresh produce to clothes, household goods and handicrafts. The vineyards of Vilafranca are all scattered in the countryside out of town – one of the closest (and most famous) is Torres.
The Festa Major (festamajor.info), at the end of August and the first couple of days in September, brings the place to a standstill. Dances and parades clog the streets, while the festival is most widely known for its display of castellers – teams of people competing to build human towers.
CAVA COUNTRY
Cava – Spain’s answer to champagne – is grown largely in the Penedès region, which also produces quality white wines and robust reds. “Cava” simply means cellar, and was the word chosen when the French objected to the word champagne. The eminently drinkable, and very affordable, sparkling wine is usually defined by its sugar content: seco (literally “dry”) has around half the sugar of a semi-seco (“semi-dry”). In addition to selling bottles of bubbly, the region’s famous bodegas often offer informative tours and tastings, and are located in stunning properties, attractions in themselves. Most can be found in the Penedès region near the town of Sant Sadurní d’Anoia, about 30km west of Barcelona, and in the countryside around Vilafranca de Penedès, 15km southwest of Sant Sadurní. And, while the Penedès continues to be dominated by the big names – Codorníu, Freixenet and Torres – a wave of small-batch wineries are beginning to present strong competition, many of them offering organic bubbly, like Parés Baltà. There are regular trains from Estació-Sants Barcelona to Sant Sadurní (40min) and Vilafranca de Penedès (50min). Also, Codorníu offers bus service to and from Barcelona; see their website for details.
THE WINERIES AROUND PENEDÈS
Bodegas Torres Finca el Maset, Pacs del Penedès, 3km northwest of Vilafranca de Penedès 938 177 487, torres.es. Torres, one of Spain’s leading wine producers, leads well-organized tours, which include trundling through the fragrant vineyards in a small tourist train, slick audiovisual presentations, and a tasting at the end. Oenophiles can opt for a more in-depth experience with wine-tasting classes on Saturdays (4–6.30pm; €22). Tours €6. Mon–Sat 9.15am–4.45pm, Sun 9.15am–1pm.
Codorníu Avda. Jaume Codorníu, just outside Sant Sadurní d’Anoia 938 913 342, codorniu.com. Codorníu, one of Spain’s best-known cava brands, is credited with bringing sparkling wine production to Spain in 1872. On a tour, you’ll explore the cellars, view the beautiful modernista premises designed by Josep Maria Puig i Cadafalch and enjoy a tasting at the end. Reservations are essential – you can call or book online. The winery is about 2km from the highway and well signposted. Tours €9. The winery also offers a range of culinary and cava experiences, including a full Mediterranean lunch paired with cavas (€50). Mon–Fri 9am–4pm, Sat & Sun 9am–noon.
Freixenet C/Joan Sala 2, visible from the highway 938 917 096, freixenet.com. This celebrated producer offers interesting tours which include a visit to their oldest cellars, originally excavated in 1922, a ride on a tourist train around the winery and samples of bubbly. There’s also a well-stocked shop. Tours must be booked in advance, either by phone or the website. Tours €7. Consult the website for hours.
Parés Baltà C/Masia Can Baltà, Pacs del Penedès, just west of Vilafranca 938 901 399, paresbalta.com. L’Alt Penedès is dotted with smaller family-run wineries, which offer a unique alternative to the biggies. Parés Baltà, helmed by two women winemakers, focuses on organic wines, and offers a variety of tours around its lovely property. In some parts, the vineyards grow amid wild parkland – Parés Baltà is one of the few producers in Spain with vineyards in a natural park, the Parc del Foix. Pick up a bottle of the award-winning rosé Parés Baltà Ros de Pacs. Tours start at €10. Generally Mon–Fri 9am–5pm, Sat & Sun 9am–1pm.
Vinseum
Pl. Jaume I 5 • May–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; Oct–April Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm • €7 • 938 900 582, vinseum.cat
Opposite the much-restored Gothic church of Santa Maria, the Vinseum features an impressive collection, including antique casks, wine-themed art through the ages and historic porrons, a traditional Catalan wine pitcher with a thin spout, designed to pour vino in a stream directly into your mouth, so that it can be shared around a table. (In George Orwell’s Homage to Catalonia, he humorously recounts his experience in drinking from one.) Rivalling the museum’s exhibits is the building itself, a thirteenth-century royal palace that was once the seat of the Catalan-Aragon crown. After your visit, sample local wines at the Vinmuseum Tavern.
Arrival and information: Vilafranca del Penedès
By train Regular trains travel from Barcelona to Vilafranca (50min).
Turisme C/Cort 14 (Mon 4–7pm, Tues–Fri 9am–1pm & 4–7pm, Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–1pm; 938 181 254, turismevilafranca.com).
Accommodation, Eating and drinking
Casa Torner i Güell Rambla de Sant Francesc 26 938 174 755, casatorneriguell.com. This graceful modernista boutique hotel is in the heart of the charming old town. The stylish rooms feature gleaming woods and sleek furnishings. Take in breezes in the leafy garden and sip local wines in the handsome cocktail lounge. €140
Inzolia C/la Palma 21, just off C/Sant Joan 938 181 938, inzolia.com. An agreeable place in town to wine taste: a range of cavas and wines are sold by the glass, and there’s a good wine shop attached. Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–10pm, Sun 5–10pm.
El Racó de la Calma C/Casal 1 938 199 299, elracodelacalma.com. Slice into squid stuffed with Tou dels Tillers, a lightly salted local creamy cow’s cheese, and chicken cannelloni enveloped in béchamel at this friendly restaurant. Don’t miss the crema Catalana, Catalonia’s version of crème brûlée, but here served as an ethereal foam. Dishes €15–23. Tues 1.15–3.45pm, Wed–Fri 1.15–3.45pm & 8.30–11pm, Sat 1.30–3.45pm & 8.30–11pm, Sun 1.30–3.45pm.
Sitges
SITGES, 40km from Barcelona, is definitely the highlight of this stretch of coast. Established in the 1960s as a holiday town, whose liberal attitudes openly challenged the rigidity of Franco’s Spain, it has now become the great weekend escape for young Barcelonans, who have created a resort very much in their own image. It’s also a noted gay holiday destination, with the nightlife to match. Indeed, if you don’t like vigorous action of all kinds, you’d be wise to avoid Sitges in the summer – staid it isn’t. Finding a place to stay in peak season can be a challenge, unless you arrive early in the day or book well in advance. None of this deters the varied and generally well-heeled visitors, however – nor should it, since Sitges as a sort of Barcelona-on-Sea is definitely worth experiencing for at least one night.
The town itself is appealing and attractive: a former fishing village whose well-maintained houses and narrow streets have attracted artists and opted-out intellectuals for a century or so. But, it’s the beach that brings most people to Sitges, and it’s not hard to find, with two strands right in town, to the west of the church. From here, a succession of platjas of varying quality and crowdedness stretches west for a couple of kilometres down the coast. A long seafront promenade flanks the beach, and all along there are beach bars, restaurants, showers and watersports facilities. Towards the end of the western stretch of beach, you’ll reach nudist beaches, a couple of which are exclusively gay.
Museu Cau Ferrat
C/Fonollar • Tues–Sun: April–June & Oct 10am–7pm; July–Sept 10am–8pm; Nov–March 10am–5pm • €10, includes Museu Maricel • 938 940 364, museusdesitges.cat
This gorgeous renovated mansion overlooks the sea and contains the Museu Cau Ferrat, which served from 1891 onwards as the home and workshop of artist and writer Santiago Rusiñol i Prats (1861–1931). Rusiñol organized five modernista festivals in Sitges between 1892 and 1899, and the town flourished as a major modernista centre under his patronage. Magnificently tiled rooms display an extraordinary array of paintings, artefacts and decorative ironwork gathered by Rusiñol, including works by Rusiñol himself, contemporaries such as Picasso, and even a couple of minor El Grecos that he bought when the painter’s reputation was much less elevated than it is today.
Museu Maricel de Mar
C/Davallada 12, adjoining Museu Cau Ferrat • Tues–Sun: April–June & Oct 10am–7pm; July–Sept 10am–8pm; Nov–March 10am–5pm • €10, includes Museu Cau Ferrat • 938 940 364, museusdesitges.cat
Browse the timeline of Catalan art from the tenth century on, including richly detailed medieval art and the nineteenth-century Luminist School of Sitges, a group of landscape artists who were inspired by the town’s beautiful seaside light and open skies.
Fundació Stämpfli Art Contemporani
Pl. de l’Ajuntament 13 • March–June & Oct Fri 5–7pm, Sat & Sun 11am–2pm & 5–7pm; July–Sept Wed–Fri 5–8pm, Sat & Sun 11am–2pm & 5–8pm; Nov–Feb Fri 4–7pm, Sat & Sun 11am–2pm • €5 • 938 940 364, fundacio-stampfli.org
Housed in Sitges’ former fish market and a similarly venerable adjoining building, the Fundació Stämpfli is home to the wide-ranging contemporary art collection of Swiss-born artist Peter Stämpfli and his wife, Anna Maria, who have been active members of the local art scene since the 1970s. The works – some eighty paintings, sculptures and more by international artists such as Erró, Gérard Fromanger and Stämpfli himself – offer a sweeping view of various art movements from the past fifty years. The renovated space in which the collection is presented is simple but beautiful, with a vaulted, wood-beamed ceiling and gleaming floors.
CARNAVAL AND FANTASY IN SITGES
Carnaval in Sitges (Feb/March) is outrageous, thanks largely to the gay community. The official programme of parades and masked balls is complemented by an unwritten but widely recognized schedule of events. The climax is the Tuesday late-night parade, in which exquisitely dressed drag queens swan about the streets in high heels, twirling lacy parasols and coyly fanning themselves. Bar doors stand wide open, bands play, and processions and celebrations go on until four in the morning.
If you’re a fan of fantasy, don’t miss the annual Sitges Film Festival (cinemasitges.com), one of the world’s premiere fantasy and horror film festivals. The festival has also expanded to embrace other genres and attracts some big-name actors and directors. It takes place over ten days in late October at venues around the town (information and venues from the turisme). In the summer, the city government usually hosts outdoor concerts at the various museums and gardens, including opera, jazz and classical guitar. Enquire at the tourist office.
Casa Bacardi
Pl. Ajuntament 11 • Guided tours Fri–Sun 11am–7.15pm (generally one in the morning and two in the afternoon); reserve by phone or via website • €9 • 938 948 151, casabacardi.es
The founder of Bacardi rum, Facundo Bacardí Massó, was born in Sitges and raised here until his mid-teens, when he emigrated to Cuba in 1830. The Casa Bacardi, housed in the historic Mercat Vell, explores the history of Bacardi rum – and its connection to Sitges – culminating in a rum tasting. Casa Bacardi also offers cocktail-making classes (€40) on weekday evenings at 6pm and 9pm.
Arrival and information: Sitges
By train Trains to Sitges leave Barcelona’s Estació-Sants every 30min throughout the day (trip length 25–40min). The train station is a 10min walk from the town centre and seafront. For current timetables and ticket information, consult RENFE (902 240 202, renfe.es).
By bus Buses stop in front of the train station, except those to and from Barcelona, which stop outside the main turisme. MonBus (938 937 511, monbus.cat) runs throughout the day (until about 10.30pm) from Sitges to Barcelona airport and the city centre.
Turisme C/Sínia Morera 1 (July–Sept Mon–Sat 9am–2pm & 4–8pm, Sun 10am–2pm; rest of year Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 938 944 251, sitgestur.cat).
Accommodation
There are dozens of hotels of all types and prices in Sitges, but it’s a good idea to reserve in high season as they fill up quickly. If you arrive without a reservation, a short walk through the central streets and along the front (particularly Pg. de la Ribera) reveals most of the possibilities. Come out of season (after Oct and before May) and the high prices tend to soften a little.

Dolce Sitges Cami del Miralpeix 12 938 109 000, dolcesitges.com; map. As far as resorts go, this is a good one. Though sprawling, with plenty of conference amenities, it still feels personalized, with warmly decorated rooms and an intimate spa. Plus, the resort is equipped with several pools; a range of breezy restaurants, most specializing in Mediterranean cuisine, along with bars and lounges; and a free shuttle bus to the beach in high season. €195
Hotel Alenti C/1er de Maig 938 114 790, hotelalenti.com; map. Sleek hotel, in an all-white, cube-shaped building, with plenty of pale wood and picture windows that let in the Sitges sunshine. Restaurant with a terrace directly onto the “Street of Sin”. €180
Hotel Mim Sitges Avda. Sofia 12 938 113 500, hotelmimsitges.com; map. This gleaming contemporary hotel ticks all the boxes: it’s central and near the beach, environment friendly and rich with amenities, including a spa and a rooftop pool and Sky Bar. Rooms are filled with natural light and bathrooms have rain showers. €229
Hotel Platjador Paseo de la Ribera, 35 938 945 054, hotelsitges.com; map. Relax in colourful rooms, some with sun-warmed balconies with views of the sparkling Mediterranean, at this inviting hotel. Plus, splash in the well-maintained pool and enjoy a hearty buffet breakfast, included in the rate. €155
Hotel Romàntic C/Sant Isidre 33 938 948 375, hotelromantic.com; map. Attractive converted nineteenth-century villa in the quiet streets away from the front, not far from the train station, with ornate, modernista touches and rooms with plenty of character; some have a terrace overlooking the palm-shaded gardens. It’s a favourite with gay visitors. Breakfast included. Closed Nov–March. €140
Eating
Most of the restaurants along the promenade feature sea-view terraces and serve paella and seafood, while the side streets are dotted with inviting spots. You can get picnic supplies at the town’s market, the Mercat Municipal, near the train station, on Avda. Artur Carbonell.

Alfresco C/Pau Barrabeitg 4 938 940 600, alfrescorestaurante.es; map. This welcoming restaurant serves superb Catalan cuisine with Asian touches, like Thai marinated lamb salad and grilled octopus with spinach. Mains €15–22. Feb–April & Oct–Dec Thurs–Sat 8.30pm–midnight; May–Sept Tues–Sun 8.30pm–midnight.
El Cable C/Barcelona 1 938 948 761, elcable.cat; map. With its lively social scene, Sitges is a tapas town – and the long-running, amiable El Cable is one of the best. Feast on patatas bravas, ham croquettes and spicy sausage. Tapas €2–8. Daily noon–3.30pm & 7–11.30pm.
Café-Bar Roy C/les Parellades 9 938 110 269; map. An old-fashioned café with dressed-up waiters and marble tables. Watch the world go by from its prime streetside perch, over a glass of cava or a fancy snack. Daily noon–late.
Mare Nostrum Pg. de la Ribera 60 938 943 393, restaurantmarenostrum.com; map. Long-established fish restaurant on the seafront, with a menu that changes according to the catch and season. Around €40 a head. March to late Dec Mon, Tues & Thurs–Sun 1–4pm & 8–11pm; closed late Dec–Feb.
La Nansa C/Carreta 24 938 941 927, restaurantlanansa.com; map. A nansa (fishing net) hangs in this amiable, family-run restaurant, which has wood-panelled walls, brass lanterns and maritime paintings. The top-notch seafood- and fish-focused menu (mains €16–26) includes the regional favourite, arroz a la Sitgetana (rice with meat, prawns, clams and a generous splash of Sitges Malvasia wine). Mon & Thurs–Sun 1.30–4pm & 8.30–11pm, Wed 8.30–11pm; closed Jan.
La Picara C/San Pere 3 938 110 285, lapicarasitges.com; map. Graze on top-notch tapas at this cheerful restaurant, from calamari to juicy shrimp to albondigas (meatballs) to croquettes. The wine list is also strong, featuring a superb selection of Catalan vintages. Tapas €8–18. Daily 11am–midnight.
El Pou C/Sant Bonaventura 21 931 289 921, elpoudesitges.com; map. Stylish, welcoming tapas bar, where the Catalan-Japanese fusion menu includes duck carpaccio and meatballs with squid. Mains €10–28. Mon & Wed 7–11.30pm, Thurs–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8–11.30pm, Sun 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm.
La Salseta C/Sant Pau 35 938 110 419, lasalseta.com; map. Classic, unpretentious Catalan dishes (cod with garlic confit, seafood paella and plenty of vegetarian options), cooked with slow-food attention and using locally sourced ingredients, keep this cosy little dining room filled with tourists and locals alike. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm.
DRINKING AND NIGHTLIFE
Late-opening bars centre on pedestrianized Carrer 1er (Primer) de Maig (popularly known as Calle del Pecado, or “Street of Sin”) and its continuation, C/Marqués de Montroig, while Carrer de les Parellades and Carrer Bonaire complete the block. In summer, this is basically one long run of disco-bars, pumping music out into the late evening, interspersed with the odd restaurant or fancier cocktail bar, all with outdoor tables vying for your euros.

SITGES’ GAY SCENE
The frenetic and ever-changing gay scene in Sitges is chronicled on a gay map and guide available from Parrots Pub, as well as from several other bars and clubs, including one of the longest-running gay clubs in Sitges, The Organic Dance Club (see below) and the sing-along bar El Piano (see below). Most of the bars and clubs are centred around Pl. Indústria and in the triangle made up by Carrer Espalter, Carrer Sant Francesc and Carrer Parellades. Sitges’ clubs are liveliest in the summer, when they’re open Friday and Saturday nights and sometimes during the week; in winter, hours vary and may be limited. Most clubs open no earlier than midnight and stay hopping until the wee hours.
For more information, check out gaysitgesguide.com and gogayguide.com.
The Organic Dance Club C/Bonaire 15 theorganicdanceclub.com; map. One of the longest-running gay clubs in Sitges, with themed dance nights, including singles’ night. Daily from 2.30am; winter hours vary.
Pacha Sitges C/San Dídac, Urb Valpineda, 1.5km north of town 938 943 812, pachasitges.com; map. Mother of all Pachas, opened in 1967 and spawning a global dynasty of mega-clubs; fans won’t be disappointed – there are two massive dancefloors, a huge sound system and big-name resident and visiting DJs. Summer generally Fri, Sat & sometimes Sun till late; winter hours depend on events.
Parrots Pub Pl. de la Indústria 938 111 219, parrotspub.com; map. One of the town’s best-known gay bars, at the top of C/1er de Maig, and a required stop for practically everyone at some point; it’s just one place where you can pick up the free gay map of Sitges. Front bar: summer daily 10am–late; the rest of the pub 5pm–late.
El Piano C/Sant Bonaventura 37 938 146 245; map. Join the crowd in singing show tunes at this friendly gay bar. Open daily 7pm–late; winter hours vary.
Privilege C/Bonaire 24 privilegesitges.com; map. This happening club has theme nights every weekend, including 1970s and 1990s disco. Daily from 2am; winter hours vary.
Sky Bar Av. Sofia 12 938 113 500 hotelmimsitges.com; map. Toast the night at this soaring bar that crowns Hotel Mim Sitges. The star here is the spectacular view, but the cocktails also hold their own, including potent mojitos, as well as sparkling cava. Hours vary and are weather-dependent, but usually: Jan–May Sat & Sun noon–6pm; June–Dec Mon–Thurs & Sun 10am–2.30am, Fri & Sat 10am–3am.
Voramar C/Port Alegre 55 pub-voramar.com; map. Charismatic, old-school seafront bar, away from the main crowds, just right for an ice-cold beer or sundowner cocktail. Daily except Wed 4.30pm–1am.
Tarragona
Sited on a rocky hill, sheer above the sea, TARRAGONA has a formidable ancient past. Settled originally by Iberians and then Carthaginians, it was later used as the base for the Roman conquest of the peninsula, which began in 218 BC with Scipio’s march south against Hannibal. The fortified city became an imperial resort and, under Augustus, Tarraco was named capital of Rome’s eastern Iberian province – the most elegant and cultured city of Roman Spain, boasting at its peak a quarter of a million inhabitants. Temples and monuments were built in and around the city and, despite a history of seemingly constant sacking and looting since Roman times, it’s this distinguished past which still asserts itself throughout modern Tarragona.
Time spent in the handsome upper town quickly shows what attracted the emperors to the city: strategically – and beautifully – placed, it’s a fine setting for some splendid Roman remains and a few excellent museums. There’s an attractive medieval section, too, while the rocky coastline below conceals a couple of reasonable beaches. If there’s a downside, it’s that Tarragona is today the second-largest port in Catalunya, so the views aren’t always unencumbered – though the fish in the Serrallo fishing quarter is consistently good and fresh. Furthermore, the city’s ugly outskirts to the south have been steadily degraded by new industries – chemical and oil refineries and a nuclear power station – which do little for Tarragona’s character as a resort.
Orientation
The city divides clearly into two parts: a predominantly medieval, walled upper town (where you’ll spend most of your time) known as La Part Alta, and the prosperous modern centre below, referred to as Eixample, or the Centre Urbà. Between the two cuts is the Rambla Nova, a sturdy provincial rival to Barcelona’s, lined with fashionable cafés and restaurants, culminating at its southern end with the lovely Balcó del Mediterràni, overlooking the sea. Parallel, and to the east, lies the Rambla Vella, marking – as its name suggests – the start of the old town. To either side of the rambles are scattered a profusion of relics from Tarragona’s Roman past, including various temples and parts of the forum, theatre and amphitheatre. Note that some of the most impressive monuments are a fair way out, but there’s enough within walking distance to occupy a good day’s sightseeing and to provide a vivid impression of life in Tarragona in imperial Roman times.
Museu Nacional Arqueològic
Pl. del Rei • June–Sept Tues–Sat 9.30am–8.30pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–May Tues–Sat 9.30am–6pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4.50 (includes the Museu i Necròpolis Paleocristians) • 977 236 209, mnat.cat
The most stimulating exhibition in town is housed in adjacent buildings off Pl. del Rei. The splendid Museu Nacional Arqueològic is a marvellous reflection of the richness of imperial Tarraco. Its huge collection is well laid out, starting in the basement with a section of the old Roman wall preserved in situ. On other floors are thematic displays on the various remains and buildings around the city, accompanied by pictures, text and relics, as well as whole rooms devoted to inscriptions, sculpture, ceramics, jewellery – even a series of anchors retrieved from the sea. More importantly, there’s an unusually complete collection of mosaics, exemplifying the stages of development from the plain black-and-white patterns of the first century AD to the elaborate polychrome pictures of the second and third centuries.
JOINT TICKETS IN TARRAGONA
The museums and monuments of Tarragona offer a couple of options for joint tickets. The Museu Nacional Arqueològic and the Museu i Necròpolis Paleocristians offer joint entry for €4.50 (see mnat.cat for details). And most of the rest of Tarragona’s sights – including the Passeig Arqueològic Muralles, Forum de la Colonia, Amfiteatre, Circ Roma and Casa Castellarnau – also have their own joint ticket for €11.05 (for more info, check tarragona.cat).
Museu i Necròpolis Paleocristians
Avda. Ramón i Cajal 78 • March–May & Oct Tues–Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 3–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm; June–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4–8pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Nov–Feb Tues–Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 3–5.30pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4.50 (includes the Museu Nacional Arqueològic) • mnat.cat • Walk 20min out of the centre down Avda. Ramón i Cajal, which runs west off Rambla Nova
The most interesting remains in town are those of the ancient Necropolis. Here, both pagan and Christian tombs have been uncovered, spanning a period from the third to the sixth century AD. The small Museu i Necropolis Paleocristians features sarcophagi and some of the most fascinating finds, such as an ivory doll with moveable arms and legs, and you can peek at the main burial grounds through the fence. Most of the relics attest to Tarragona’s importance as a centre of Christianity: St Paul preached here, and the city became an important Visigothic bishopric after the break-up of Roman power.
Passeig Arqueològic Muralles
Portal del Roser, Avda. Catalunya • Mid-May to Sept Tues–Sat 10am–9pm, Sun 10am–3pm; rest of year Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–3pm • €3.30 or €11.05 joint ticket • 977 245 796, taragona.cat
The Passeig Arqueològic Muralles is a promenade that encircles the northern half of the old town. From the entrance at the Portal del Roser, a path runs between Roman walls of the third century BC and the sloping, outer fortifications erected by the British in 1709 to secure the city during the War of the Spanish Succession. Megalithic walls built by the Iberians are excellently preserved in places, too, particularly two awesome gateways; the huge blocks used in their construction are quite distinct from the more refined Roman additions. Vantage points (and occasional telescopes) give views across the plain behind the city and around to the sea, while various objects are displayed within the passeig: several Roman columns, a fine bronze statue of Augustus and eighteenth-century cannons still defending the city’s heights. Just beyond the entrance on the right, a small doorway leads up to the battlements from where you get fine views of the old city.
Forum
Pl. del Forum • Mid-May to Sept Tues–Sat 10am–9pm, Sun 10am–3pm; rest of year Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–3pm • €3.30 or €11.05 joint ticket • 977 242 501, tarragona.cat
In the centre of town, the Roman forum, or rather forums, have also survived, since – as provincial capital – Tarragona sustained both a ceremonial Forum Provincial (the scant remnants of which are displayed on Pl. del Forum) and a Forum de la Colonia on C/Lleida, whose more substantial remains are on the western side of Rambla Nova, near the Mercat Central. Located on the flat land near the port, this was the commercial centre of imperial Tarraco and the main meeting place for locals for three centuries. The site, which contained temples and small shops arranged around a porticoed square, has been split by a main road: a footbridge now connects the two halves where you can see a water cistern, house foundations, fragments of stone inscriptions and four elegant columns.
HUMAN CASTLES
It’s not often that you’ll come across a group of grown men and women who willingly climb onto each other’s back to form a tall, if a bit wobbly, human tower. But when you do, it’s a sight to behold. Catalunya’s famous castellers – teams of people competing to build human towers – originated in Valls, near Tarragona, at the end of the eighteenth century. Over time, the rest of Catalunya embraced the tradition, and castells now form a part of festivals throughout the region. The impressive castells can loom up to ten human storeys tall, and are completed by a small child scrambling to the very top.
Castells are a feature of Tarragona’s annual Festival of Santa Tecla in mid-September. To learn more about the history, pay a visit to Tarragona’s Casa de la Festa, Via Augusta 4 (end June to end Sept Tues–Sat 11am–2pm & 5–9pm, Sun 11am–2pm; rest of year Tues & Wed 9am–1pm, Thurs & Fri 9am–1pm & 5–7pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 5–7pm, Sun 11am–2pm; free; 977 220 086). The Festa Major of Vilafranca del Penedès in late August also showcases castells.
Amfiteatre
Parc del Miracle • Mid-May to Sept Tues–Sat 10am–9pm, Sun 10am–3pm; rest of year Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–3pm • €3.30 or €11.05 joint ticket • tarragona.cat
A group of Tarragona’s tangible Roman remains lie close to each other at the seaward end of the Rambla Vella. Most rewarding is the Amfiteatre, built into the green slopes of Parc del Miracle. The tiered seats backing onto the sea are original, and from the top you can look north, up the coast, to the headland; the rest of the seating was reconstructed in 1969–70, along with the surviving tunnels and structural buildings.
Circ Roma and Pretori
Rambla Vella, Pl. del Rei • Mid-May to Sept Tues–Sat 10am–9pm, Sun 10am–3pm; rest of year Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–3pm • €3.30 or €11.05 joint ticket • tarragona.cat
The Circ Roma, or Roman Circus, was the site of chariot races. The visible sections encompass vaults that are set back from the street under the gloom of the surrounding buildings. You can exit through the Roman Pretori tower on Pl. del Rei.
Casa Castellarnau
C/Cavallers 14 • Mid-May to Sept Tues–Sat 10am–9pm, Sun 10am–3pm; rest of year Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–3pm • €3.30 or €11.05 joint ticket • 977 242 220, tarragona.cat
Strolling the old town’s streets will also enable you to track down one of Tarragona’s finest medieval mansions and lesser-known museums, the Casa Castellarnau. The interior courtyard alone rewards a visit, with its arches and stone coats of arms built over Roman vaults. Otherwise, the small-scale collections are largely archeological and historical (Roman jars and the like), rescued from banality by some rich eighteenth-century Catalan furniture and furnishings on the upper floor.
The Catedral
Pl. de Palau 2 • Mid-March to Oct Mon 3–6pm, Tues–Sat 10am–7pm; Nov to mid-March Mon–Sat 10am–5pm • €5; guided visit €15, call ahead to book • 977 226 935, catedraltarragona.com
The central C/Major climbs to the quarter’s focal point, the Catedral, which sits at the top of a broad flight of steps. This, quite apart from its own grand beauty, is a perfect example of the transition from Romanesque to Gothic forms. You’ll see the change highlighted in the main facade, where a soaring Gothic portal is framed by Romanesque doors, surmounted by a cross and an elaborate rose window. Except for services, entrance to the Catedral is through the cloisters (claustre; signposted up a street to the left of the facade), themselves superbly executed with pointed Gothic arches softened by smaller round divisions. The cloister also has several oddly sculpted capitals, one of which represents a cat’s funeral being directed by rats. Note that the Catedral has been undergoing renovations, so parts of it may be closed to the public, and the entry fee may therefore be reduced. The ticket also gives access to the Museu Diocesà, which is piled high with ecclesiastical treasures.
Serrallo
A fifteen-minute walk west along the industrial harbourfront from the train station (or the same distance south from the Necropolis) takes you to the working port of Serrallo, Tarragona’s so-called “fishermen’s quarter”. Built a century ago, the harbour here isn’t particularly attractive, though it’s authentic enough – fishing smacks tied up, nets laid out on the ground for mending. The real interest for visitors is the line of seafood restaurants which fronts the main Moll dels Pescadors. The warehouses nearby, back towards town, have been given a face-lift, as has the Estació Marítima (cruise-ship terminal).
Arrival and departure: Tarragona
By train The train station is on Pg. de Espanya (902 432 343), from which it’s an easy walk into town. In addition to the regular trains, there are high-speed AVE trains from Barcelona, Madrid and other main cities which arrive at the Camp de Tarragona AVE station, a 10min taxi ride from the centre.
Destinations Barcelona (every 30min; 1hr); Cambrils (12 daily; 20min); Lleida (12 daily; 2hr, Talgo 1hr, AVE 30min); Sitges (direct every 30min; 1hr); Tortosa (13 daily; 1hr); Valencia (16 daily; 4hr, Talgo 2hr 15min); Zaragoza (12 daily; 3hr 30min).
By bus The bus terminal is at the end of Rambla Nova, at Pl. Imperial Tarraco.
Destinations Barcelona (18 daily; 1hr 30min); Berga (July & Aug daily, rest of year Sat & Sun only; 3hr 10min); La Seu d’Urgell (daily at 8am; 3hr 45min); Lleida (6 daily; 1hr 45min); Montblanc (3 daily; 50min); Poblet (Mon–Sat 3 daily; 1hr 5min); Tortosa (Mon–Fri 1 daily; 1hr 30min); Valencia (7 daily; 3hr 30min); Zaragoza (4 daily; 4hr).
INFORMATION
Turisme C/Major 39 (July–Sept Mon–Sat 9am–9pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–June Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 977 250 795, tarragonaturisme.cat). There are a few other information booths/offices, including on Rambla Nova (summer daily 10am–8pm; winter Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm).
Regional tourist office C/Fortuny 4, just south of Rambla Nova (Mon–Fri 9am–2pm & 4–6.30pm, Sat 9am–2pm; 977 233 415, tarragonaturisme.cat). Especially good if you’re travelling farther afield.
Accommodation
Alexandra Aparthotel Rambla Nova 71 977 248 701, ah-alexandra.com; map. Outside the hotel, you’re in the thick of things, right on busy Rambla Nova. Inside, the airy Alexandra offers a quiet retreat, with generously sized rooms and studios, many with fully equipped kitchens and dining rooms, making this an ideal spot for families and groups of friends. Doubles €110, studios €159
Camping Las Palmeras 977 208 081, laspalmeras.com; map. There are a number of campsites east of town including this well-maintained site at Platja Llarga, 3km northeast along the coast. Also on offer are spacious bungalows (from €405 for three nights; usually a minimum of three nights in high season), which are ideal for families and groups €30
Hotel Astari Vía Augusta 95–97 977 236 900, hotelastari.com; map. Friendly hotel with modern rooms, a decent swimming pool and pleasant garden. It’s a 15min walk from the old town, and less than a 10min stroll from the nearest beach. €95
Hotel Lauria Rambla Nova 20 977 236 712, hotel-lauria.com; map. Well-located just off the main rambla with modern if functional rooms and a small outdoor pool. €95
Hotel Núria Vía Augusta 145 977 235 011, hotelnuria.com; map. Amiable hotel near Arrabassada beach, 1km northeast of Tarragona – the playa stretches right nearby, and town is about a 25min walk away (or you can opt for one of the regular buses). The decor tends towards minimalist, and there’s a restaurant-café, with a weekday lunchtime menu. €95
Hotel Pigal Cardenal Cervantes 6 977 506 818, hostelpigal.com; map. Proof that even budget digs can be stylish, this cheery little hotel, with a blue facade fronted by cute balconies, has simple rooms with wood furnishings and tiled floors. €85
Hotel Plaça de la Font Pl. de la Font 26 977 246 134, hotelpdelafont.com; map. Central, cosy hotel with simple, well-scrubbed rooms and a small restaurant with a cheery terrace on the plaça. €70
Eating
There are plenty of good restaurants in the centre of Tarragona; many – particularly in and around Pl. de la Font – have outdoor seating in the summer. Alternatively, you could try the fish and seafood places down in Serrallo – not cheap, but the food is fresh and you can find some menus for around €15–20 in the narrow street behind the main Moll dels Pescadors. Tarragona’s marina (Port Esportiu) features several clubs and bars, which generally heat up in the summer – though note that they come and go with great regularity. It’s in town – around the old quarter and the Catedral and in the streets between the train station and Rambla Nova – that you’ll find spots with more historical, local appeal.

Almosta C/Ventallols 977 222 742; map. Organic is the name of the game at this small innovative rustic restaurant. The seasonal menu celebrates fresh produce, from rabbit confit squirted with citrus and served with yucca flower to a cherry tartare with mascarpone ice cream. Dishes €13–25. Thurs–Mon 1–4 & 8.30–11pm.
AQ Restaurant C/Les Coques 7 977 215 954, aq-restaurant.com; map. Glossy restaurant – the sky-lit dining room sports honey-hued walls and sleek furnishings – with impressive cuisine to match (main dishes €18–25). Husband-and-wife team Quintín and Ana (after whom the restaurant is named) serve up seasonal food with flair including superb fresh fish and shellfish. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 9–11pm; usually closed second two weeks of Dec.
Les Coques C/Sant Llorenç 15 977 228 300, les-coques.com; map. Top-notch Catalan fare in a comfortable restaurant near the Catedral, with a weekday lunch menu for €25. Mon–Sat 1.30–4pm & 9–10.30pm.
L’Home dels Nassos C/Merceria 13, hdnrestaurant.wordpress.com; map. A creative couple run this tiny restaurant that has landed on the foodie trail, thanks to its experimental Catalan menu rooted in local produce. Enjoy everything from grilled fish with wild-flower garnishes to foie mousse on a carpaccio of strawberries. Dishes €15–25. Generally Wed–Sat 9–11.30pm.
El Llagut C/Natzaret 10 977 228 938; map. Rice and seafood are the stars of the menu at this handsome tavern. Try arròs negre (rice with squid ink) and a huge array of fresh seafood, from monkfish to mussels to cuttlefish. The well-curated wine list showcases superb vintages from around Catalunya. Dishes €16–30. Tues–Sat 1–4pm & 8.30–11pm & Sun 1–4pm.
Racó de l’Abat C/Abat 2 977 780 371, abatrestaurant.com; map. Beamed ceilings and crimson plaster walls give this Catalan restaurant – located in a former palace dating from the sixteenth century – an intimate, heritage vibe. The menú del día starts at €15, while most mains (fresh fish, grilled meats) cost around €12–16. June–Sept daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm; Oct–May Mon–Thurs & Sun 1–4pm, Fri 1–4pm & 8–11pm, Sat 8–11pm.
Restaurant Arcs Misser Sitges 13 977 218 040, restaurantarcs.com; map. Ancient, graceful stone arches – hence the name – preside over a cosy dining room. Fresh Mediterranean dishes include cod with a cabrales cheese sauce and duck with sweet-and-sour cherry preserves. Expect to pay around €40/person, without drinks. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Sadoll C/Mare de Déu de la Mercè 1 977 244 404, sadollrestaurant.com; map. Inviting restaurant tucked away in a quiet corner near the Catedral and featuring fresh, creative dishes in an elegant Art Nouveau dining room. Dishes €15–20. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
El Terrat C/Pons d’Icart 19 977 248 485, elterratrestaurant.com; map. Delve into the wonderfully varied menu, from tapas to traditional to avant-garde, at this established restaurant with a large terrace. Dishes may include delectable croquettes with ceps and foie; duck with an orange and vanilla emulsion; and cod with a compote of tomato and raisins. Dishes €17–25. Tues–Sat 1.30–3pm & 8.30–11pm.
De Vins C/Mendez Núñez 10 977 230 020, devins.es; map. Perennially popular restaurant with an excellent seasonal menu of traditional dishes – jamón iberico, clams in a marinara sauce, steak tartare. Go for the weekday lunchtime menu (€20) or the tapas tasting menu (€30). Wed–Sat 1–3.45pm & 8–10.45pm, Sun 1–3.45pm.
Les Voltes C/Trinquet Vell 12 977 230 651, restaurantlesvoltes.cat; map. Atmospheric restaurant, with a fabulous location within Roman vaults, and recommended for its hearty seafood and meats, ranging in price from €15 to €20. Tues–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8–10.30pm, Sun 1–3.30pm.
Around Tarragona
The coast between Tarragona and the historic town of Altafulla, 11km east, is littered with Roman remains, well worth checking out, though for all but the Roman aqueduct you’ll need your own transport. West of Tarragona, the pleasant town of Reus features an entertaining museum on master Catalan architect Antoni Gaudí.
Aqüeducte de les Ferreres
Open during daylight hours • Free • 977 242 220, tarragona.cat • Parking on site; check with turisme about bus transport to the site
Perhaps the most remarkable (and least visited) of Tarragona’s monuments stands 4km outside the original city walls, reached via a small, signposted road off the main Lleida highway. This is the Roman Aqüeducte de les Ferreres, which brought water from the Ríu Gayo, some 32km away. The most impressive extant section, nearly 220m long and 27m high, lies in an overgrown valley in the middle of nowhere: the utilitarian beauty of the aqueduct is surpassed only by the one at Segovia and the Pont du Gard, in the south of France. Popularly, it is known as El Pont del Diable (Devil’s Bridge) because, remarked Richard Ford, of the Spanish habit of “giving all praise to ‘the Devil’, as Pontifex Maximus”.
Reus
Gaudí aficionados might want to take a spin through the small, handsome city of Reus, 14km west of Tarragona, where the modernisme master, Gaudí, was born in 1852. While Reus has no Gaudí buildings – he left at the age of 16 – it does feature a smattering of other modernista structures, all of which form part of the town’s Ruta del Modernisme. Besides Gaudí, Reus is popular for its good shopping, especially clothing, thanks in part to the town’s once-thriving textile industry.
Gaudí Centre
Pl. del Mercadal 3 • Mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 11am–2pm; mid-Sept to mid-June Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 11am–2pm • €9, under-14s €5, under-8s free • 977 010 670, gaudicentre.com
The sleek Gaudí Centre offers an engaging overview of the great artist via three floors of tactile and sensory exhibits. The first floor focuses on young Gaudí and his connection with Reus; look for what is believed to be the only handwritten notebook by Gaudí still in existence. The second floor, called “Gaudí the Innovator”, focuses on his progressive designs. The top floor shows a film on Gaudí and covers his influence on architecture around the globe.
WINE TOURING IN THE PRIORAT
Around 35km west of Tarragona lies one of Catalunya’s top wine regions, the Priorat, which was awarded its DOC in 2001. The red wine produced here, and in the adjacent Montsant DOC, is highly sought after, and the cellers have started to follow their more established competitors in La Rioja by cashing in with wine tours and tastings. The turisme in Tarragona has up-to-date information, or you can try the local office in Falset (Mon–Fri 9am–3pm & 4–7pm, Sat 10am–2pm, Sun 11am–2pm; 977 831 023, turismepriorat.org). Most tours cost €5–7, and many have English-speaking guides – reservations are essential.
La Conreria de Scala Dei C/Mitja Galta 32, Scala Dei, just south of La Morera de Montsant 977 827 027, vinslaconreria.com. This established winery, named after the Carthusian monks of Scala Dei, offers tours through its cellars and vineyards followed by tastings. Book tours in advance. Tours from €10. Mon–Fri 11am–5pm, Sat & Sun 11am–2pm.
Costers del Siurana Camí Manyetes, Gratallops 977 839 276, costersdelsiurana.com. This highly regarded winery offers tours through the cellars, and also runs the charming, small Cellers de Gratallop restaurant nearby, which serves regional cuisine – and Priorat wine, of course. Call or email ahead to enquire about tour hours and prices.
Arrival and information: reus
By bus Regular trains and buses connect Reus with Tarragona (15min) and Barcelona (1hr 40min). Buses also travel regularly between the Barcelona airport and Reus airport, which lies about 6km east of Reus and handles various budget European airlines.
Turisme Inside the Gaudí Centre (mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 9.30am–8pm, Sun 11am–2pm; mid-Sept to mid-June Mon–Sat 9.30am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 977 010 670, reus.cat/turisme). You can pick up a map at the helpful turisme, and they also offer a variety of good guided tours of the city, which sometimes include access to modernista buildings otherwise closed to the public.
Accommodation and eating
Mas Passamaner Camí de la Serra 52, La Selva del Camp, 5km northwest of Reus 977 766 333, maspassamaner.com. For a further taste of modernisme, consider staying at this hotel designed by the master architect Lluis Domènech i Montaner in 1922, and converted into a five-star hotel, with elegant rooms, a pool and a spa. €222
Restaurant Joan Urgellès C/d’Aleus 7 977 342 178, joanurgelles.com. Excellent contemporary cuisine featuring fresh seafood, like cod with apple allioli. Daily menus from €19.50. Mon 8.30–11pm, Tues–Sat 1.30–4pm & 8.30–11pm.
Altafulla
ALTAFULLA makes a reasonable stop. Take a wander about the old town, where there's a 400-year-old castle (privately owned), the Baroque Església Parroquial de Sant Martí (open for services only), which was completed in 1705 and has a distinctive octagonal dome, and a pair of gateways left standing from the original medieval walls.
Villa Romana dels Munts
C/Villa Romana • June–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4–8pm, Sun 10am–2pm; March–May & Oct Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 3–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Jan–Feb & Nov–Dec Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 3–5.30pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €2.50 • 977 652 806, mnat.cat
Surrounded by a sleepy estate of holiday homes, the Villa Romana dels Munts is one of the more important finds in the region, primarily because of the exceptional mosaics and paintings that decorated its rooms and thermal baths – indicating an owner of high standing. The mosaics are preserved in the Museu Nacional Arqueològic in Tarragona and today the villa is worth a look chiefly for the ruins of its thermal baths, which include a remarkably well-preserved arch and water tank.
Arrival and information: Altafulla
By bus and train Regular buses and trains connect Altafulla with Tarragona (10min).
Turisme C/Marqués de Tamarit 16 altafulla.cat (Jan–March Mon–Fri 9am–3pm; May, June & Sept–Dec Mon–Thurs 9am–3pm, Fri & Sat 4–7pm; July & Aug daily 10am–2pm & 4–8pm; 977 651 426); Pl. dels Vents (summer only; 977 650 752). Note that hours change depending on city budget.
Tortosa
The only town of any size in Catalunya’s deep south is TORTOSA, slightly inland astride the Ríu Ebre. In the Civil War the front was outside Tortosa for several months until the Nationalists eventually took the town in April 1938. The battle cost 35,000 lives, and is commemorated by a gaunt metal monument on a huge stone plinth in the middle of the river in town. The fighting took its toll in other ways, too: there’s little left of the medieval quarter, the barri antic, which lies on the east bank of the Ebro, north of the modern commercial district. Nonetheless, Tortosa still throws a boisterous and popular Festa del Renaixement (Renaissance Festival; festadelrenaixement.org) in late July, which celebrates the city’s history, with thousands turning out in period costumes, along with theatre, street entertainment, live music, free-flowing wine and more.
Catedral de Santa Maria
C/Portal del Palau • Tues–Sat 10am–1pm & 4.30–7pm, Sun usually 12.30–2pm
The Catedral de Santa Maria is worth a look. Founded originally in the twelfth century on the site of an earlier mosque, it was rebuilt in the fourteenth century, and its Gothic interior and quiet cloister – although much worn – are both lovely.
THE WINE CATHEDRAL
The name says it all: The Bodega Pagos de Híbera Catedral del Vi (Wine Cathedral; C/Pilonet, 977 426 234, catedraldelvi.com; €5.50; Mon–Fri & Sun 10am–2.30pm & 3.30–7pm, Sat 10am–8pm) rises over Pinell de Brai, roughly 30km north of Tortosa, in the Terra Alta region, which is Catalunya’s southernmost wine region. Designed by Gaudí disciple Cèsar Martinell, the winery is a magnificent tribute to modernisme, revealing its architectural hallmarks, from soaring stone arches to colourful tiling. The winery offers self-guided audio tours and wine and olive-oil tastings, as well as free guided visits at noon and 5pm on the weekends. Make a day of it, and sample local cuisine – and Pagos de Híbera wine – at the stately restaurant (open Sat & Sun for lunch only), which serves an excellent menu (€26). Dishes include grilled octopus and traditional Catalan sausage, followed by choice desserts – try the luscious crema Catalana. Northwest of Pinell de Brai lies the town of Gandesa, the capital of the Terra Alta wine region, and home to the Celler Cooperatiu de Gandesa (Avda. Catalunya 28, 977 420 017, coopgandesa.com; Mon–Sat 9am–1pm & 3–7pm, Sun 9am–2pm), another magnificent building also designed by Martinell.
La Suda and the Jardins del Príncep
Jardins del Príncep • May to mid-Sept Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4.30–7.30pm, Sun 11am–1.30pm; mid-Sept to April 10am–1.30pm & 3.30–6.30pm, Sun 11am–1.30pm • €3 • tortosaturisme.cat
Tortosa’s brightest point is also its highest. La Suda, the old castle, sits perched above the Catedral, glowering from behind its battlements at the Ebre valley below and the mountains beyond. Like so many in Spain, the castle has been converted into a luxury parador, but there’s nothing to stop you climbing up for a magnificent view from the walls, or from going into the plush bar and having a drink.
The Jardins del Príncep, which sit at the base of the castle, feature an impressive collection of sculptures of the human figure by Santiago de Santiago.
Arrival and information: Tortosa
By train Tortosa is connected by regular trains to Barcelona (2hr) and Tarragona (1hr).
By bus Buses run from Tortosa to Vinaròs (in Castellón province to the south), from where you can reach the wonderful inland mountain town of Morella; and to Tarragona and the Delta de l’Ebre area.
Turisme Jardins del Príncep (May to mid-Sept Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4.30–7.30pm, Sun 11am–1.30pm; mid-Sept to April 10am–1.30pm & 3.30–6.30pm, Sun 11am–1.30pm; 977 442 005, tortosaturisme.cat).
accommodation and eating
Hotel Rural Panxampla Carretera d’Alfara, 7km west of Tortosa in the hamlet of Els Reguers 977 474 135, hotelruralpanxampla.com. For a taste of the Tortosa countryside, try this comfortable hotel rural that has elegant rooms with stone walls and wood-beam ceilings. The rustic restaurant serves Catalan cuisine. Breakfast included. €105
Parador Nacional Castell de la Suda 977 444 450, parador.es. For a splurge, it’s well worth opting for this historic parador, where you’ll feel like you’ve stepped into the medieval era. It also has one of the better restaurants in town, open to nonguests and specializing in fish from the Ebro delta. €110
La Torreta de Remolins C/David Ferrando 4, 977 441 893, latorretaremolins.com. Dine on traditional Catalan cuisine, from grilled meats and fish to rice dishes and salads. The wine list is culled from the Terra Alta region, including superb reds. Dishes €10–20. Mon–Thurs 1–4pm, Fri & Sat 1–4pm & 8.30–10pm.
The Delta de l’Ebre
In the bottom corner of Catalunya is the Delta de l’Ebre (Ebro Delta), 320 square kilometres of sandy delta constituting the biggest wetland in Catalunya and one of the most important aquatic habitats in the western Mediterranean. Designated a natural park, its brackish lagoons, marshes, dunes and reed beds are home to thousands of wintering birds and provide excellent fishing; around fifteen percent of the total Catalan catch comes from this area. The scenery is unique in Catalunya, with low roads running through field after field of rice paddies, punctuated by solitary houses and small villages, before emerging onto dune-lined beaches. Since much of the area of the Parc Natural de Delta de l’Ebre is a protected zone, access is limited, and it’s best to visit with your own transport. Check in with the well-stocked tourist office about birdwatching opportunities and other nature tours and treks.
Deltebre
The best place to start to get a good sense of Delta de l’Ebre is the town of DELTEBRE, at the centre of the delta, 30km from Tortosa. There’s also an interesting Ecomuseum, in the park information centre (Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 3–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm, until 6pm in winter, Sun 10am–2pm; €1.20), which has an aquarium displaying species found in the delta.
Riumar
The town of RIUMAR, 10km east of Deltebre, also makes for a good base to explore the area. It has a couple of restaurants and good, if windy, bathing on a sandy beach, connected to the road by duckboards winding through the dunes, and more remote beaches accessible to the north.
information and tours: Delta de l’Ebre
Park information centre Martí Buera 22, on the main highway, on the edge of Deltebre (Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 3–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm, until 6pm in winter; 977 489 679, deltebre.net). The well-signposted information centre can provide you with a map of the delta and has information about tours and local walks.
River cruises A river cruise is a good way to experience the delta. Several boat companies, including Creuers Delta de l’Ebre (977 480 128,  creuersdeltaebre.com), the Santa Sussanna (629 204 117) and Olmos (977 480 548) operate trips of an hour or so on the river. Enquire at the tourist office or call ahead, because the boats sometimes only operate for groups; prices start at around €9/trip.
accommodation and eating
Casa Núri Final Goles de Ebre, Riumar 977 480 128, restaurantnuri.com. Dine on a wide range of seafood, from shrimp to mussels, as well as the local speciality, arròs a banda – similar to paella except that the rice is brought before the seafood. Dishes €13–25. Daily 10am–10.30pm; lunch only in winter.
Delta Hotel Avda. del Canal, on the outskirts of Deltebre towards Riumar 977 480 046, deltahotel.net. This comfortable hotel has well-cared-for, rustic rooms, some with wood-beam ceilings, as well as a breezy garden. €95
Montblanc
The walled medieval town of MONTBLANC, 8km before the turning to the monastery at Poblet, is a surprisingly beautiful place to discover in the middle of nowhere. The Pl. Major is picturesque, and livens up for the evening passeig, while there are many fine little Romanesque and Gothic monuments contained within the town’s tight circle of old streets; all are marked on the map in front of the town’s medieval gateway, the Torre-portal de Bové, which is just 100m or so up from the train station. On the southern side of the walls, the Torre-portal de Sant Jordi marks the spot where San Jordi, or St George (patron saint of Catalunya as well as England), slew the dragon, an event commemorated with a fiesta on April 23.
Santa Maria la Major
Pl. Major • Mon–Sat 11am–1pm & 4–6pm, Sun 11am–2pm • Free • 977 860 110
Just above the central Pl. Major, stands the grand Gothic parish church of Santa Maria la Major; its elaborate facade has lions’ faces on either side of the main doorway and cherubs swarming up the pillars. There’s a fine view from the once fortified mound that rises behind the church (known as the Pla de Santa Bàrbara) over the rooftops, defensive towers and walls, and away across the plain.
Sant Miquel
Pl. St Miquel • Open only as part of a guided tour • Free
East from Santa Maria along C/Major is the church of Sant Miquel, which dates from the fourteenth century, and has Romanesque and Gothic elements, an impressive coffered ceiling and lovely Gothic lateral chapels. The church was the seat of the Catalan courts from 1307 to 1370.
Museu Comarcal de la Conca de Barberà
Just off Pl. Major • Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm • Free or nominal fee (varies) • 977 860 349, concadebarbera.info
This fine local history museum, set in a medieval home dating from the thirteenth century, has well-curated exhibits on the history and culture of the region, including on the art of glassmaking, and features a reproduction of an old chemist’s shop.
Arrival and information: montblanc
By bus Regular trains and buses connect Montblanc to Tarragona (50min) and Lleida (50min).
Turisme At the eastern end of C/Major (Mon–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 3–6.30pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 977 861 733, montblancmedieval.cat). Helpful turisme in the old church of Sant Francesc, just outside the walls. They offer guided tours of medieval Montblanc (€5, including a glass of cava).
acccommodation
Fonda Cal Blasi C/Alenyà 11–13 977 861 336, fondacalblasi.com. This warm and friendly fonda is in a restored nineteenth-century stone townhouse, just a short walk from Pl. Major. They also serve home-cooked meals rooted in seasonal produce, along with local wines from Conca de Barberà. €80
Santa Coloma de Queralt
This well-preserved pocket of history, hidden amid the plains of the comarca of Conca de Barbarà, lies 29km north of Montblanc. SANTA COLOMA DE QUERALT is a town made for meandering – and soaking up the medieval past. The best way to explore is via guided tours run by the tourist office, which include a variety of sights: the lovely porticoed squares, the Pl. de l’Església and Pl. Major; the fourteenth-century Ermita de Santa Maria de Bell-lloc, home to a 1370 alabaster sepulchre of the Counts of Queralt; and the Cal Jaume Punto, a perfectly preserved general store from 1848.
El Castell dels Comtes
Pl. del Castell • Open only as part of a guided tour (€3)
Santa Coloma’s most iconic building is the formidable eleventh-century El Castell dels Comtes, crowned by a handsome defence tower that you can ascend for gorgeous views of the surrounding countryside. The grand interior houses government offices, the tourist office and an exhibition space that features changing exhibits, from historic photos to sculptures.
Arrival and information: santa coloma de queralt
By bus Regular buses connect Santa Coloma de Queralt to Tarragona (1hr) and Barcelona (2hr).
Turisme Castell dels Comtes de Santa Coloma (Tues–Sun 10am–2pm; 977 880 478, stacqueralt.altanet.org). Helpful, info-packed turisme within the Castell dels Comtes, with an adjoining exhibition space. They offer excellent guided tours with a variety of themes, including one that focuses on the historical buildings of town (€3) and a culinary tour (price varies), which celebrates local produce and wine. Times vary for tours; contact tourist office to enquire and book.
Eating
Hostal Colomí C/Raval de Jesús 12, 977 880 653. Catalunya is justly famous for its wildly progressive cuisine, exemplified by the Roca Brothers in Girona. But, this culinary stardom is rooted in the region’s traditional dishes, many of which reveal Catalunya’s natural bounty. For a taste, turn to les germanes Camps – the Camps sisters – who helm Hostal Colomí, founded in 1948. For many, this isn’t just the best traditional Catalan cuisine in the Tarragona region – it’s the best in the country. The meal starts with two large porrons (pitchers) of wine – one white, one red – and a platter of pa amb tomàquet (bread smeared in tomato and drizzled in olive oil). The feast continues, including warm ham croquettes, cod and platters of grilled meat and asparagus from the open-air grill, culminating in dessert – crema Catalana, of course. Best of all: the set lunch menu is an excellent deal, at €15. Tues–Sun 1–4pm.
The Monestir de Poblet
Mid-March to mid-Oct Mon–Sat 10am–12.30pm & 3–5.55pm, Sun 10.30am–12.25pm & 3–5.25pm; mid-Oct to mid-March Mon–Sat 10am–12.30pm & 3–5.25pm, Sun 10.30am–12.25pm & 3–5.25pm • €7.50; €10 with guided tour • 977 870 254, poblet.cat
There are few ruins more stirring than the Monestir de Poblet, lying in glorious open country, vast and sprawling within massive battlemented walls and towered gateways. Once the great monastery of Catalunya, it was in effect a complete manorial village and enjoyed scarcely credible rights, powers and wealth. Founded in 1151 by Ramón Berenguer IV, who united the kingdoms of Catalunya and Aragón, it was planned from the beginning on an immensely grand scale. The kings of Aragón-Catalunya chose to be buried in its chapel and for three centuries diverted huge sums for its endowment, a munificence that was inevitably corrupting. By the late Middle Ages Poblet had become a byword for decadence – there are lewder stories about this than any other Cistercian monastery – and so it continued, hated by the local peasantry, until the Carlist revolution of 1835 when a mob burned and tore it apart. Italian Cistercians repopulated the monastery in 1940 and over the decades since then it’s been subject to continual – and superb – maintenance and restoration.
The cloisters
As so often, the cloisters, focus of monastic life, are the most evocative and beautiful part. Late Romanesque, and sporting a pavilion and fountain, they open onto a series of rooms: a splendid Gothic chapterhouse (with the former abbots’ tombs set in the floor), wine cellars, a parlour, a kitchen equipped with ranges and copper pots, and a sombre, wood-panelled refectory.
The chapel
Beyond, you enter the chapel in which the twelfth- and thirteenth-century tombs of the kings of Aragón have been meticulously restored by Frederico Marès, the manic collector of Barcelona. They lie in marble sarcophagi on either side of the nave, focusing attention on the central sixteenth-century altarpiece.
The dormitory
You’ll also be shown the vast old dormitory, to which there’s direct access from the chapel choir, a poignant reminder of Cistercian discipline. From the dormitory (half of which is sealed off since it’s still in use), a door leads out onto the cloister roof for views down into the cloister itself and up the chapel towers.
Arrival and INFORMATION: Monestir de Poblet
By bus Two to three buses a day (Mon–Sat) run to Poblet from Tarragona or Lleida, passing right by the monastery. It’s an easy day-trip from either city.
By train By train, you get off at the ruined station of L’Espluga de Francolí, from where it’s a beautiful 3km walk to the monastery, much of it along a signposted country track. Since it lies on the same line, it’s easy enough to combine a trip to Poblet with a stop-off at Montblanc.
Turisme Pg. Abat Conill 9, Poblet (summer Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 3–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm; winter Tues–Fri 10am–2pm & 2.30–5pm, Sat 10am–1.30pm & 3–6.30pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 977 871 247).
accommodation and eating
Staying overnight at Poblet is an attractive proposition if you have your own transport, since it makes a good base for an excursion into the surrounding countryside. A kilometre up the road from Poblet, around the walls, the hamlet of Les Masies has a couple of hotels and restaurants, while L’Espluga, 2km northwest, also has a few places to stay.

Hostatgeria de Poblet 977 871 201, hostatgeriadepoblet.cat. For the full monastic experience, stay at the lovely Hostatgeria de Poblet, which rises up alongside the monastery. Designed by Spanish architect Mariano Bayón, the building blends harmoniously with its surroundings, featuring honey-hued stone, a cloister and a courtyard planted with olive trees. The monastic philosophy extends to all parts of the property, which is quiet and soothing, with no TVs in the simply furnished rooms. Guests are invited to participate in the monastery’s liturgy and services. The restaurant serves seasonal dishes, some inspired by historical monastic menus. Dishes €15–25. Breakfast included. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm. €90
Sercotel Villa Engràcia Carretera de les Masies, Les Masies 977 870 308, villaengracia.com. This attractive former spa built in 1888, set in pleasant, leafy grounds, has elegant, well-outfitted rooms, an outdoor pool and tennis courts. €155
Prades
If you have time and transport, a couple of excursions into the countryside surrounding Poblet are well worth making. The red-stone walled village of PRADES, in the Serra de Prades, 20km from the monastery, is a beautifully sited and tranquil place that needs no other excuse for a visit. It’s also the place to be during the second weekend of July, when they replace the water in the fountain with cava, and you can join in and help yourself – or order a bottle of bubbly at a terrace bar in the porticoed plaça and enjoy the scene. The area around Poblet is also home to two more twelfth-century Cistercian monasteries.
Reial Monestir de Santes Creus
June–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–6.30pm, Oct–May 10am–5pm • €4.50 • larutadelcister.info
The Reial Monestir de Santes Creus lies 7km north of the Barcelona–Lleida highway, and is clearly signposted. It’s built in Transitional style, with a grand Gothic cloister and some Romanesque traces, and you can explore the dormitory, chapterhouse and main church.
Monestir de Vallbona de les Monges
March–Oct Tues–Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 4.30–6.30pm, Sun noon–1.30pm & 4.30–6.30pm; Nov–Feb closes 5.30pm • €4 • larutadelcister.info
The Monestir de Vallbona de les Monges is about 16km north of Poblet, and reached via Montblanc. This monastery of monges (nuns) has been occupied continuously for over 800 years. The church, built over the twelfth to fourteenth centuries, is a particularly noteworthy example of the transition between Romanesque and Gothic, and has a rectangular nave and elegant cloisters.
Lleida
LLEIDA (Lérida), at the heart of a fertile plain in inland Catalunya, has a rich history. First a municipium under the Roman Empire and later the centre of a small Arab kingdom, it was reconquered by the Catalans and became the seat of a bishopric in 1149. Little of those periods survives in today’s city but there is one building of outstanding interest, the splendid Catedral, which is sufficient justification in itself to visit. Several interesting museums and a steep set of old-town streets will easily occupy any remaining time. Rooms are easy to come by, and the students at the local university fill the streets and bars on weekend evenings, including at the breezy Pl. de Sant Joan, in good-natured throngs.
Seu Vella and Castillo del Rey
Catedral Summer Tues–Sat 10am–7.30pm, Sun 10am–3pm; winter Tues–Fri 10am–1.30pm & 3–5.30pm, Sat 10am–5.30pm, Sun 10am–3pm; last entry 30min before closing • turoseuvella.cat • Castillo del Rey Summer Tues–Sat 10.30am–2pm & 4–7.30pm, Sun 10am–3pm; winter Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 3–5.30pm, Sun 10am–3pm; last entry 30min before closing • €7 for Catedral and castle
The Seu Vella, or old Catedral, is enclosed within the walls of the ruined Castillo del Rey (also called La Suda), high above the Ríu Segre, a twenty-minute climb from the centre of town. It’s a peculiar fortified building, which in 1707 was deconsecrated and taken over by the military, remaining in their hands until 1940. Enormous damage was inflicted over the years but the church remains a notable example of the Transitional style, similar in many respects to the Catedral of Tarragona. The Gothic cloisters – among the largest cloisters in the world – are masterly, each walk comprising arches different in size and shape but sharing delicate stone tracery. They served the military as a canteen and kitchen. You can also visit parts of the reconstructed castle, such as the fortified walls – the views from the walls over the plain are stupendous. Note: From the old town, there is an elevator that you can enter at Pl. de Sant Joan, which will whisk you to the Seu Vella complex.
Seu Nova
Mon–Fri 9.30am–1pm & 5.30–7.30pm, Sat & Sun 9.30am–1pm & 5.30–8.30pm • Free
You can climb back down from the old Catedral towards the river by way of the new Catedral, La Seu Nova. It’s an austere eighteenth-century building with Neoclassical doorways, a main facade topped by a large crest of the Casa de Borbón and a series of minuscule, high stained-glass windows.
Museu de Lleida
C/Sant Crist 1 • June–Sept Tues–Thurs & Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Fri & Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–May Tues–Thurs & Sat 10am–2pm & 4–6pm, Fri & Sun 10am–2pm • €5 • 973 28 30 75, museudelleida.cat
The spacious Museu de Lleida is the city’s flagship museum. Two floors show off ancient finds from throughout Lleida and Catalunya, including Romanesque altarpieces, a Visigoth baptismal font and stone sculptures from the Seu Vella.
Centre d’Art La Panera
Pl. de la Panera 2 • Tues–Fri 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sat 11am–2pm & 5–8pm, Sun 11am–2pm • Free • 973 262 185, lapanera.cat
For top-notch exhibits of contemporary art, check out the creative Centre d’Art La Panera. The building’s history is as interesting as the art inside: it dates back to the twelfth century, when it was Lleida’s trading exchange and market, and you can still see evidence of its medieval roots in the original colonnade, made up of a line of 21 stone columns. In the early 1600s, the building was acquired by the canonry of the Catedral, who used it to store and sell food products – hence its official name, La Panera dels Canonges, or The Canons’ Pantry.
THE SNAIL TRAIL IN LLEDIA
You don’t need to visit France for the finest escargot. Lleida’s snails – caragols – rival their neighbours to the north. This small capital of inland Catalunya is one of Spain’s most famous snail cities. With snails, simpler is better: the most delicious preparation is caragols a la llauna – grilled, and seasoned with olive oil, salt, pepper and garlic. On the side? A generous dollop of allioli. This being Spain, there is of course a dedicated festival – the Aplec del Caragol in late May is one of the largest snail festivals in the country, with more than twelve tons (yes, tons) of snails served. But, you don’t need to wait until then to feast on snails: Lleida is filled with restaurants that serve the delicacy.
Arrival and information: Lleida
By train Trains regularly connect Lleida to Barcelona via Valls or Reus/Tarragona (17 daily; 2hr–4hr 15min, AVE 1hr). There are also services to: La Pobla de Segur (3 daily; 2hr 10min); Tarragona (8 daily; 1hr 30min–2hr); and Zaragoza (20 daily; 1hr 50min). For current timetables and ticket information, consult RENFE (902 240 202, renfe.es). It’s a 15–20min walk east of the train station to Pl. de Sant Joan.
By bus Lleida has regular buses to Barcelona (Mon–Sat 10 daily, Sun 4 daily; 2hr 15min); Huesca (5 daily; 2hr 30min); La Seu d’Urgell (2 daily; 3hr); Montblanc (6 daily; 1hr 30min); La Pobla de Segur (daily; 2hr); Poblet (Mon–Sat 3 daily; 1hr 15min); Tarragona (3 daily; 2hr); Vielha, via Túnel de Vielha (2 daily; 3hr); and Zaragoza (Mon–Sat 6 daily, Sun 2; 2hr 30min). It’s a 15–20min walk west of the bus station, down Avda. de Blondel, to Pl. de Sant Joan.
By plane The Lleida-Alguaire airport (973 032 700, aeroportlleida.cat), 15km northwest of Lleida, is a regional hub. UK charter flights also occasionally fly here, ferrying skiers to the Pyrenees.
Turisme C/Mayor 31 (Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 973 700 402, turismedelleida.cat).
Accommodation and eating
Lleida is dotted with a variety of accommodation, including near the train station; along Rambla Ferran, which leads into the centre; and on central Pl. Sant Joan. The streets north of the church of Sant Martí hold a range of restaurants; this is where the students come to eat and hang out at the loud music-bars along the block formed by C/Sant Martí, C/Camp de Mart, C/Balmes and Avda. Prat de la Riba.

El Celler del Roser C/Cavallers 24 973 239 070. One of the better spots to sample the celebrated snails is at this amiable, mid-priced restaurant, with wood tables and exposed brick. There’s a strong local wine list. Mon–Sat 1–4pm & 8.30–11pm.
Ferreruela C/Bobalà 8 973 221 159, ferreruela.com. Showcasing cocina de la terra (local cuisine), this jovial restaurant serves an excellent range, including Lleida’s signature snails with allioli, grilled cod with samfaina (ratatouille) and juicy lamb. Plus, as part of the dessert menu, they offer an excellent assortment of local cheeses. Dishes €15–25. Mon–Wed 1–4pm, Thurs–Sat 1–4pm & 8–11pm.
Hotel Zenit Lleida C/General Brito 21 973 229 191, zenithoteles.com. This central hotel – you’re within easy walking distance to train station and city centre – has modern, simple and clean rooms. €60
La Huerta Avda. Tortosa 7 973 245 040, lahuerta-restaurant.com. Dive into platters of succulent snails and other traditional Catalan fare at this Lleida institution, which was established in the mid-1960s. Dishes €9–22. Daily 1–4pm & 8.30–11pm.
< Back to Catalunya



=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================



2 CITY BEACHES Barcelona has a golden seafront, with 5km of sandy beaches stretching from Barceloneta to Diagonal Mar.

3 A TAPAS TOUR Hopping from bar to bar, sampling local specialities, is an ideal way to experience some of Barcelona’s finest food.

4 CAMP NOU The magnificent Camp Nou stadium is home to FC Barcelona, one of the world’s very greatest football teams, and has a museum full of trophies to prove it.

5 FUNDACIÓ JOAN MIRÓ The adventurous Fundació Joan Miró honours the work of one of Catalunya’s greatest artists.

7 TRANSBORDADOR AERI Sky-high cable car that whisks passengers right across the harbour to Montjuïc; try keeping your eyes open – the views are superb.

8 TIBIDABO Scale the heights of Mount Tibidabo for fantastic views and a wonderful amusement park.

11 MUSEU NACIONAL D’ART DE CATALUNYA (MNAC) The National Museum of Art celebrates the grandeur of Catalunya’s Romanesque and Gothic heritage and the emergence of modernisme.

12 THE RAMBLAS A stroll down Barcelona’s most famous thoroughfare is a must for tourists and locals alike.

13 PARK GÜELL The city’s most extraordinary park is a fantasyland born of Antoni Gaudí’s fertile imagination.






ITINERARIES
Architectural wonderland, gastronomic trailblazer, sun-kissed playground – Barcelona is all of these things and more. Let these one- to two-day itineraries lead you to its most emblematic sights, as well as those that sparkle below the surface.
FROM A GREAT HEIGHT
You can literally see it all in a couple of days with this jaunt that takes you from the summit of a mountain to the top of the city’s culinary scene.

1 Transbordador Aeri Dangle high above the harbour on a daredevil cable-car ride between the beachside neighbourhood of Barceloneta and the Jardins de Miramar on Montjuïc (173m).

2 Tibidabo The journey up to the mountain-top amusement park is part of the fun, but the grand prize is the panorama of city, sea and sky that greets you at the summit of the 550m peak.

3 Mirablau. Chic bar and restaurant in Tibidabo, where you can enjoy tapas and cocktails as night-time Barcelona glitters and glints in the background.

4 Arenas de Barcelona The rooftop terrace atop this bullfighting-ring-turned-shopping-centre affords grand views of Plaça d’Espanya and the domed Palau Nacional.


GAUDÍ’S LEGACY

5 Park Güell This hugely ambitious, never completed housing development holds a gloriously colourful mosaic-decorated terrace and an enormous Hall of Columns; the architect’s own house stands nearby.

6 Gaudí Centre In Gaudí’s home town, an enjoyable day-trip 100km southwest of Barcelona, a fascinating gallery explores the roots of his inspiration.

SAVING THE PENNIES
You can easily spend two to three days taking advantage of these inexpensive, if not free, attractions that are scattered around the city.

1 The beaches Unfurl a towel, slather on the sunblock and settle in for a relaxing day of golden sand and aquamarine waters at any of the city’s eight beaches.

4 Els Encants Vells If it’s bargains you seek, then bargains you shall find at the city’s main flea market, where spirited haggling is the name of the game.

5 Caixa Forum A superb collection of contemporary art fills the halls of Caixa Forum, an arts and cultural complex that’s free to the public.

6 Font Màgica A gorgeous display of music, water and colour that’s been attracting oohs and aahs since its debut during the 1929 International Exhibition.

STRICTLY CATALAN
The following places offer a deeper understanding of what defines Catalunya and its people.

2 The sardana Performances of this dance – a graceful symbol of Catalan unity and identity – take place every Sunday afternoon at Plaça de la Seu.

3 Lunch at Can Culleretes Said to be the oldest restaurant in Barcelona (if not Spain), this wood-panelled gem serves quintessential Catalan food in a timeless setting.

6 Gràcia To experience small-town Catalunya without leaving the city, head to the charming squares and narrow streets of Gràcia, where the air is filled with the Catalan language.



< Back to Basics



Crime and personal safety
Catalunya has its own autonomous police force, the Mossos d’Esquadra (gencat.net/mossos), dressed in navy-blue uniforms with red trim. They have gradually taken over most of the local duties traditionally carried out by Spain’s other police services, namely the Policía Nacional (policia.es) – the national police, whose uniforms resemble blue combat gear – and the Guàrdia Urbana (bcn.cat/guardiaurbana), municipal police in blue shirts and high-visibility jackets. There’s also the Guàrdia Civil, a national paramilitary force in green uniforms, seen guarding some public buildings, and at airports and border crossings.
In theory you’re supposed to carry some kind of identification at all times, and the police can stop you in the street and demand to see it. In practice they’re rarely bothered if you’re clearly a tourist, and a photocopy of your passport or a photo-driving licence should suffice.
If you’re robbed, you need to go to the police to report it, not least because your insurance company will require a police report. Don’t expect a great deal of concern if your loss is relatively small – but do expect the process of completing forms and formalities to take ages.
The easiest place to report a crime is at the Guàrdia Urbana station at Ramblas 43, opposite Pl. Reial, Liceu 932 562 477 (24hr; English spoken), though there’s a Guàrdia Urbana office in each city district (see their website).
However, to get a police report for your insurance you need to go to the Mossos d’Esquadra station at C/Nou de la Rambla 76–80, El Raval, Paral.lel (933 062 300). You can fill in a report online (under “Denunciar”, then “Denúncies per internet” on gencat.net/mossos (English option available), but you’ll still have to go to the office within 72hr to sign the document.

STAYING SAFE
Barcelona has a reputation as a city plagued by petty crime, but there’s no need to be unduly paranoid. Take all reasonable precautions, and your trip should be safe. Sling bags across your body, not off one shoulder; don’t carry wallets in back pockets; and don’t hang bags on the backs of café chairs. Make photocopies of your passport, leaving the original and any tickets in the hotel safe.
Be on your guard when on public transport, or on the crowded Ramblas and the medieval streets to either side – at night, avoid unlit streets and dark alleys. While you can take many beggars at face value, you should beware of people who directly accost you or who try to distract you in any other manner – like the “helpful” person pointing out bird shit (shaving cream or something similar) on your jacket while someone else relieves you of your money.

Left luggage
There are left-luggage offices (consigna) at Barcelona Sants train station (daily 5.30am–11pm; €3.60–5.20/day) and Barcelona Nord bus station (daily 6am–11.30pm; €3.50–5). Locker Barcelona, near Plaça Catalunya at C/Estruc 36, Barri Gòtic, Catalunya/Urquinaona (daily: July–Oct 8.30am–10.30pm; Nov–June 9am–9pm; €6.50–12; 933 028 796, lockerbarcelona.com), lets you access your belongings throughout the day free of charge, and offers other services such as luggage weighing, boarding pass printing and internet access.

Tipping
Service in most restaurants and bars is considered to be included in the price. Locals leave only a few cents or round up the change for a coffee or a drink, and a euro or two for most meals, though fancier restaurants will expect ten to fifteen percent. Taxi drivers usually get around five percent, more if they help with bags or are similarly useful, while hotel porters should be tipped a euro or two for their assistance.
Toilets
Public toilets are few and far between, and seldom particularly clean. Bars and restaurants are more likely to have proper (and cleaner) toilets, though there’s no guarantee, even in the poshest of places. Ask for toaleta or serveis (lavabo or servicios in Spanish). Dones or Damas (Ladies) and Homes/Hombres or Caballeros (Gentlemen) are the usual signs.





========NEW





Sant Pere, La Ribera and Ciutadella
city’s favourite park, Parc de la Ciutadella

!?
---
Plaça de Sant Pere
Plaça de Sant Agusti Vell

Parc de la Ciutadella
Daily 10am–dusk • Park entrance free • Entrances on Pg. de Picasso (Barceloneta, or a short walk from La Ribera) and Pg. de Pujades (Arc de Triomf); use Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica for direct access to the zoo
While you might escape to Montjuïc or the Collserola hills for the air, there’s no beating the spacious Parc de la Ciutadella for a quick break from the downtown bustle. Most of its showcase buildings, which include Catalunya’s legislative assembly, the Parlament, are not open to the public, but it’s still a nice place to spend a lazy summer afternoon strolling the garden paths or rowing a boat across the ornamental lake.
The park’s name refers to the Bourbon citadel that Felipe V erected here, to quell the local population following Barcelona’s spirited resistance during the War of the Spanish Succession. A great part of La Ribera neighbourhood was brutally destroyed to make way for the fortress, and this symbol of authority survived uneasily until 1869, when the military moved base. Its only surviving portion is the much-altered Arsenal, which since 1980 has housed the Catalan parliament building. The surrounding area subsequently became a park, and hosted the 1888 Universal Exhibition – hence the eye-catching buildings and monuments erected by pioneering modernista architects.

Arc de Triomf
Pg. de Lluís Companys • Arc de Triomf
The giant brick Arc de Triomf, at the inland end of the Parc de la Ciutadella, announces the architectural splendours to come in the park itself. Roman in scale, and conceived as a bold statement of Catalan intent, it’s studded with ceramic figures and motifs, and topped by two pairs of bulbous domes. Reliefs on its main facade show Barcelona welcoming visitors to the 1888 Universal Exhibition.

Cascada
Parc de la Ciutadella • Arc de Triomf
The first of the major projects undertaken inside the Parc de la Ciutadella, the monumental Cascada fountain in its northeast corner was designed by Josep Fontseré i Mestrès, the architect chosen to oversee the conversion of the former citadel grounds into a park. His assistant in the task was Antoni Gaudí, then a young student, and its Baroque extravagance is suggestive of the flamboyant decoration that was to become Gaudí’s trademark. Gaudí worked on the hydraulic system for the fountain, and is thought to have had a hand in the design of the iron park gates.
Near the small open-air café-kiosk that makes the ideal vantage point from which to contemplate the fountain’s tiers and swirls, you can rent a rowing boat on the lake and paddle about among the ducks.

Castell dels Tres Dragons and Museu Martorell
Pg. de Picasso • Arc de Triomf
The Castell dels Tres Dragons (Three Dragons Castle), a whimsical red-brick confection at the park’s northwest corner, was designed by Lluís Domènech i Montaner for use as a café-restaurant for the Universal Exhibition. Home for many years to the local zoology museum, it’s not currently in use. Along with the similarly defunct Neoclassical Museu Martorell, which opened in 1882 as Barcelona’s first public museum and long housed the city’s geological collections, it’s slated for restoration at some point.

Umbracle and Hivernacle
Pg. de Picasso • Under renovation at time of writing • Arc de Triomf
The twin unsung glories of Ciutadella are its plant houses, arranged either side of the Museu Martorell. Both are currently closed to visitors and looking somewhat dilapidated, though the plants within are sufficiently tended to cling to life. The imposing Umbracle (palm house) is a handsome structure with a barrelled wood-slat roof supported by cast-iron pillars, which allows shafts of light to play across the palms and ferns, while the enclosed greenhouses of the larger Hivernacle (conservatory) are separated by a soaring glass-roofed terrace.

Zoo de Barcelona
Main entrance on C/Wellington • Daily: Jan to late March & late Oct to Dec 10am–5.30pm, last admission 5pm; late March to mid-May & mid-Sept to late Oct 10am–7pm, last admission 6pm; mid-May to mid-Sept 10am–8pm, last admission 7pm • €19.90, under-13s €11.95, under-3s free •  902 457 545, zoobarcelona.cat • Signposted from Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica, or tram T4 stops outside
The Zoo de Barcelona occupies the entire southeastern portion of Ciutadella park. Still essentially nineteenth century in character, its tiny enclosures squeezed into the formal grounds of a public park, it boasts over two thousand animals, including such endangered species as Komodo dragons, Iberian wolves and Sumatran tigers.
In 2016, the zoo was obliged to close its dolphinarium, which failed to meet minimal legal requirements. Despite ongoing renovation work that is of course said to be aimed at improving conditions for the rest of its captive creatures, and despite the obvious enthusiasm of local families, it cannot in good faith be recommended.

< Back to Sant Pere, La Ribera and Ciutadella





The waterfront

Plaça del Portal de la Pau
Drassanes
The Plaça del Portal de la Pau marks the seaward end of a stroll along the Ramblas, coming up hard against the teeming traffic that runs along the harbourfront road. The landmark Columbus monument is straight ahead in the middle of the traffic circle, with the quayside square beyond flanked by the Port de Barcelona (Port Authority) and Duana (Customs House) buildings. An antiques market, where you can find dusty treasures, fills the square at the weekend (10am–8pm). To the south, a landscaped wharf known as the Moll de Barcelona leads to the Torre de Jaume I cable-car station and the Estació Marítima, departure point for ferries to the Balearics (trasmediterranea.es). The large, bulbous building perched in the centre of the wharf is the city’s World Trade Centre, housing a deluxe hotel, plus offices, convention halls, shops and restaurants.

HARBOUR RIDES BY SKY AND SEA
Barcelona’s most thrilling ride has to be the Transbordador Aeri cable car, which sweeps passengers all the way across the inner harbour between the top of the Torre de Sant Sebastiá, near the tip of Barceloneta, and the hill of Montjuïc (departures every 15min; daily: March, April & mid-Sept to Oct 10.30am–7pm; June to mid-Sept 10.30am–8pm; Nov–Feb 11am–5.30pm; €11 one-way, €16.50 return; 934 304 716, telefericodebarcelona.com). As you dangle high above the water, you can enjoy superb views over the city. There’s an additional stop in the middle, at the 100m-tall Torre de Jaume I in front of the World Trade Centre in Port Vell. As the cable car can only carry nineteen people at a time, you can expect queues – and potential disappointment – in summer and at weekends. Strong winds can close the ride altogether.





Barceloneta
Barceloneta
An eighteenth-century neighbourhood of tightly packed streets, Barceloneta squeezes between the harbour on one side and the beach on the other. It was laid out in 1755, on a site that previously consisted of nothing but mudflats, primarily to re-house inhabitants of the Ribera district to the north, whose homes had been destroyed to make way for the Ciutadella fortress. Its long, narrow streets, broken at intervals by small squares, are lined with small, tall and abundantly windowed houses, designed to give the sailors and fishing folk who originally lived here plenty of sun and fresh air.
Though this remains very much a workaday community, some original houses feature a decorative flourish here, a sculpted balcony or a carved lintel there, while an eighteenth-century fountain and the Neoclassical church of Sant Miquel del Port survives in Plaça de la Barceloneta. A block over, in Plaça de la Font, the beautifully refurbished local food market, Mercat de la Barceloneta (Mon–Thurs & Sat 7am–3pm, Fri 7am–8pm), boasts a couple of excellent bars and restaurants.
Barceloneta is renowned for its seafood restaurants, which can be found all over the neighbourhood. They’re especially concentrated along the harbourside Passeig Joan de Borbó, where for most of the year you can eat at an outdoor table, though if you’d rather escape the traffic the restaurants along the nearby marina are preferable.

Casa de la Barceloneta 1761
C/Sant Carles 6 • Tues–Fri 10.30am–1pm & 4–8pm, Sat 10am–2pm • Free • 936 242 666, casadelabarceloneta1761.bcn.cat • Barceloneta
The two-storey Casa de la Barceloneta 1761 has seen its fair share of change over the centuries. Constructed, much as its name might lead you to surmise, in 1761, the Baroque-style building, which faces three streets, was home to one of the neighbourhood’s maritime families before being divided into smaller units, turned into a grocery store and then converted into a restaurant. Subsquently falling into disrepair, it was restored and transformed into a cultural and interpretive centre. Inside, you’ll find a small yet informative (for those who read Catalan) exhibition about the evolution of the neighbourhood, as well as an upstairs gallery space.
La Fàbrica del Sol
Pg. Salvat Papasseit 1 • Currently closed for renovation • 932 564 430, bcn.cat/lafabricadelsol • Barceloneta
A yellow-painted, red-brick building on the edge of the Parc de la Barceloneta that used to be the city’s gas works is now home to La Fàbrica del Sol, a sustainable eco-centre designed to take a close look at green living in all its guises, from recycling to transport. At press time, it was closed to visitors pending renovations. Assuming it has reopened by the time you read this, you can expect to see displays, gadgets and exhibits on assorted eco-themes. Head up to the roof to admire the building’s garden and solar thermal system, and you’ll also get a view of the park’s whimsical modernista water tower (1905), rising like a minaret above the palms.
Platja de Sant Sebastià and Passeig Marítim
Barceloneta
Barceloneta’s beach, Platja de Sant Sebastià, is the first in the series of sandy city beaches that stretches northeast along the coast all the way to the River Besòs. It curves out past the indoor and outdoor swimming pools of the Club Natació to the landmark, sail-shaped W Barcelona hotel, designed by Catalan architect Ricardo Bofill.
Meanwhile, at the Barceloneta end you’ll encounter a plethora of beach bars, outdoor cafés and public sculptures, while a double row of palms backs the Passeig Marítim esplanade that parallels the beach as far as the Port Olímpic (a 15min walk). Sunbathers sprawl on the sands, swimmers venture into the water, and there’s a surfing break immediately offshore. Rickshaw tours weave through the strolling pedestrians, and itinerant vendors patrol the strands offering snacks and drinks including mojitos and samosas.
Just short of Port Olímpic, a dramatic latticed funnel of wood and steel marks the Parc Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona (PRBB), the city’s biomedical research centre.
Port Olímpic
Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica
As you approach the Olympic port along the Passeig Marítim, a shimmering golden mirage above the promenade slowly resolves itself into a huge copper fish, courtesy of Frank Gehry, architect of Bilbao’s Guggenheim. The emblem of the huge seafront development that was constructed for the 1992 Olympics – and hosted many of the watersports events – it’s backed by the city’s two tallest buildings, the Torre Mapfre and the steel-framed Hotel Arts Barcelona, both 154m high.
The bulk of the Port Olímpic action is contained within two wharves: the Moll de Mestral has a lower deck by the marina lined with cafés, bars and terrassas, while the Moll de Gregal sports a double-decker tier of seafood restaurants. The whole zone turns into a full-on resort in summer, backed by a series of class-conscious clubs along Passeig Marítim appealing to rich kids and celebs. It all has the feel of pretty much any of the exclusive and elitist enclaves that pepper the entire shoreline of the western Mediterranean.

The beaches beyond Port Olímpic
From Port Olímpic (Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica) it’s a 15min walk along the promenade to Bogatell beach, or around 1hr all the way to Parc del Fòrum
Northeast along the coast from Port Olímpic, the city beaches continue right the way up to Parc del Fòrum and Diagonal Mar, split into separate named sections Nova Icària, Bogatell, Mar Bella, Nova Mar Bella and Llevant, each with showers, playgrounds and open-air café-bars (Mar Bella offers an area for nudists). It’s a pretty extraordinary leisure facility to find so close to a city centre – the water might not be as clean as it could be, but the sands are regularly swept and replenished, while joggers, cyclists and bladers have one of the Med’s best views for company.
Poble Nou
Poble Nou (at the junction of C/Pujades and C/Bilbao, one block east of Rambla del Poble Nou), or bus #36 from Port Olímpic
The next neighbourhood along from Port Olímpic, Poble Nou (New Village), is a largely nineteenth-century industrial area that has been in the throes of redevelopment since before the millennium, and continues to change year upon year. Under the suitably contemporary rubric of 22@Barcelona (22barcelona.com), the authorities are slowly and hopefully transforming 500 acres of land into “the innovation district”.
You can come here directly on the metro, but it’s far nicer to walk along the promenade from Port Olímpic (15min) to Poble Nou’s spruced-up beaches before crossing the main highway to reach the neighbourhood’s main spine, Rambla del Poble Nou.
BEACH BUSINESS
On Port Olímpic’s boardwalk arcade, in front of the Hospital del Mar, the city council operates a beach visitor centre, the Centre de la Platja (March–May Tues–Sun 10am–2pm; June–Sept Tues–Sun 10am–7pm; 932 210 348, bcn.cat/platges), as a kind of one-stop shop for information and activities along the seafront. There’s a programme of seafront walks and activities, a small summer lending library for beach reading, and Frisbees, volleyball and beach tennis gear available for pick-up games on the sand.
Rambla del Poble Nou
Poble Nou
Poble Nou may be in the throes of change, but the main avenue still ticks along largely unaffected. Pretty, tree-lined Rambla del Poble Nou remains entirely local in character – no cardsharps or human statues here – with a run of modest shops, cafés and restaurants, including the classic milk and juice bar of El Tío Ché.
Cementiri de Poble Nou
Avgda. d’Icaria • Daily 8am–6pm; free guided tours on first and third Sun, 10.30am & 12.30pm (Spanish & Catalan) • 934 841 999, cbsa.es • Llacuna or bus #36 from Port Olímpic
The vast nineteenth-century Cementiri de Poble Nou has its tombs set in walls 7m high – the families that tend them have to climb great stepladders to reach the uppermost tiers. With traffic noise muted by the high walls, and birdsong accompanying a stroll around the flower-lined pavements, quiet courtyards, sculpted angels and tiny chapels, this village of the dead is a rare haven in contemporary Barcelona.
Diagonal Mar
El Maresme-Fòrum or tram T4 to Fòrum via Glòries and Avgda. Diagonal
Developed in the wake of 2004’s Universal Forum of Cultures Expo, the waterfront district north of Poble Nou is promoted as Diagonal Mar. It’s anchored by the Diagonal Mar shopping mall, with classy hotels, convention centres and exhibition halls grouped nearby.
Everything here is on a grand scale, starting with the showpiece Museu Blau, which houses the main exhibitions of the Natural Science Museum, while the vast landscaped area beyond is a showpiece urban leisure project, the Parc del Fòrum. The district can still seem a bit soulless much of the time – hot as Hades in summer, buffeted by biting winds and all but devoid of pedestrians in winter– but for anyone stirred by heroic-scale public projects it’s worth the metro ride. The tram comes down here too, so you could always glide there or back via Avinguda Diagonal and Glòries to see more of Barcelona in transformation.

Museu Blau
Pl. Leonardo da Vinci 4–5, Parc del Fòrum • March–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–8pm, Oct–Feb Tues–Fri 10am–6pm, Sat 10am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–8pm • €6, or €7 combined ticket with Jardi Botànic at Montjuïc, ages 16–29 €2.70/€3.50, under-16s free; free for all first Sun of the month & every Sun after 3pm • 932 566 002, museuciencies.bcn.cat • El Maresme-Fòrum, or tram T4 to Fòrum
A dazzling blue biscuit tin of a building, hovering seemingly unsupported above the ground, the dramatic Museu Blau (Blue Museum) was designed by Jacques Herzog to hold the Natural Science Museum’s state-of-the-art reboot of its heritage collections. Inside, the permanent Planeta Vida (Planet Life) exhibition plots a journey through nothing less than the history of life on earth. Starting logically enough with the Big Bang, it draws on a million-strong array of rocks, fossils, plants and animals, ranging from the smallest microbe to a giant whale skeleton. It’s heavily focused on evolutionary, whole-earth, Gaia principles, with plenty of entertaining, interactive bells and whistles to guide you through topics as diverse as sex and reproduction and conservation of the environment.
Parc del Fòrum
El Maresme-Fòrum, or tram T4 to Fòrum via Glòries and Avgda. Diagonal
The claim of Diagonal Mar’s main open space, the Parc del Fòrum, to be at 150,000 square metres the second-largest square in the world after Beijing’s Tiananmen Square, is palpably not true – several other squares are actually bigger than both. Unquestionably, though, it’s an immense, undulating expanse, spreading towards the sea and culminating in a giant solar-panelled canopy that overlooks the marina, beach and park areas. In summer, temporary bars, dancefloors, open-air cinema and chill-out zones are established, while the city authorities have shifted some of the larger annual music festivals and events down here to inject a bit of life outside convention time.
< Back to The waterfront

Montjuïc
It takes at least a day to see Montjuïc, the steep hill and park that rises over Barcelona to the southwest. This spot has a long and venerable history; the Romans, who built a shrine to Jupiter here, knew it as Mons Iovis. That may well be the root of its modern name, though it’s often also explained as deriving from the siting of a Jewish cemetery on these slopes. Modern Montjuïc is essentially a cultural leisure park, anchored around the magnificent collection of Catalan treasures in the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC). Two further galleries, one devoted to Catalan artist Joan Miró, and the other, the Caixa Forum, showcasing changing exhibitions of international contemporary art, are similarly unmissable. In addition, Montjuïc holds separate archeological, ethnological, military and theatrical museums, as well as structures and stadiums from the 1992 Olympics.
From the Roman era right up until the 1950s, Montjuïc was quarried to provide the stone that built much of Barcelona. As late as the 1890s, the hill was nothing more than a collection of private farms and woodland on the edge of the old town, though some landscaping had already taken place by the time Montjuïc was chosen to host the International Exhibition of 1929. The slopes were then laid with gardens, terraces and fountains, while monumental Neoclassical buildings, many of which later became museums, were added to the north side. The Poble Espanyol (Spanish Village) is the most extraordinary relic, while assorted lush gardens still offer respite from the crowds. Above all, perhaps, Barcelona’s most favoured hill offers city and ocean views to savour: from the steps in front of the Museu Nacional, from the castle ramparts, from the Olympic terraces or from the cable cars that zigzag up the steepest slopes.

ARRIVAL AND GETTING AROUND: MONTJUÏC
By metro For easy access to Caixa Forum, Poble Espanyol and the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC) use Espanya (follow exit signs for “Fira/Exposició”).
By funicular The Funicular de Montjuïc departs from inside the metro station at Paral.lel and takes a couple of minutes to ascend the hill (every 10 min: Mon–Fri 7.30am–10pm, Sat, Sun & public hols 9am–10pm, Nov–March till 8pm; €2.15, transport tickets and passes valid; tmb.cat). From the upper station on Avgda. de Miramar, you can switch to the Montjuïc cable car or bus services, or walk in around 5min to the Fundació Joan Miró, more like 20min to the MNAC.
Telefèric de Montjuïc The Telefèric de Montjuïc cable car, which starts from Avgda. de Miramar just across from the higher Funicular de Montjuïc station, and serves as a complement to the funicular, carries passengers in automated eight-seater gondolas up to the castle (daily: March–May & Oct 10am–7pm; June–Sept 10am–-9pm; Nov–Feb 10am–6pm; €8.20 one-way/€12.50 return, under-12s €6.50/9, under-4s free; telefericdemontjuic.cat).
Transbordador Aeri The cross-harbour Transbordador Aeri cable car crosses high above Barcelona’s harbour, all the way from Barceloneta to the Jardins de Miramar (departures every 15min; daily: March–May & mid-Sept to Oct 10.30am–7pm; June to mid-Sept 10.30am–8pm; Nov 11am–7pm; Dec–Feb 11am–5.30pm; €11 one-way/€16.50 return; 934 304 716, telefericodebarcelona.com). From there it’s a 10min walk to the Montjuïc cable car and funicular stations, and another 5min to the Fundació Joan Miró.
By bus City bus #150 (transport tickets and passes valid) covers a circular route around the main Montjuïc attractions, departing from a stop on Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina, outside Espanya. 
INFORMATION
Timing your visit Montjuïc covers a wide area, so to cover everything you might prefer to make two separate visits, perhaps seeing MNAC, Poble Espanyol and the Olympic area on one day, and Fundació Joan Miró, the cable car and the castle on the other. From Espanya, it takes a good hour to walk on the road around the hill, past Poble Espanyol, the Olympic area and Fundació Joan Miró to the cross-harbour cable-car station at the far end of Montjuïc. Escalators up from MNAC to the Olympic area cut out the worst of the slog. Walking up the steep hill all the way to the castle is not advised in hot weather (though steps climb through the gardens and between the roads) – use the cable car.
Eating and drinking Places to eat are thin on the ground, though there are good cafés in Caixa Forum, Fundació Joan Miró and MNAC, outdoor snack bars at the castle and on the slopes below MNAC, and a restaurant with outdoor terrace at the Font del Gat in the Jardins de Laribal, below the Fundació Joan Miró. Decent restaurants and bars also abound in the neighbouring barri of Poble Sec.
Plaça d’Espanya
Espanya
The vast Plaça d’Espanya, laid out to plans drawn up by architect Josep Puig i Cadafalch, was completed in 1929 to serve as the gateway to that year’s International Exhibition. Arranged around a huge Neoclassical fountain, the square is unlike any other in Barcelona, a radical departure from the modernisme then in vogue.
Landmark structures surrounding the square include the majestic former bullring, now reincarnated as the Arenas de Barcelona shopping and leisure centre, and the striking twin towers, 47m high, that stand at the foot of the imposing Avinguda de la Reina María Cristina. This avenue spears up towards Montjuïc, and is lined by huge exhibition halls used for trade fairs. From Plaça de Carles Buïgas at its upper end, monumental steps, fortunately paralleled by escalators, ascend the hill to the Palau Nacional (home of MNAC), past water cascades and under the flanking walls of two grand Viennese-style pavilions. The higher you climb, the better the views, while a few café-kiosks put out seats on the way up to MNAC.
FLYING THE FLAG
Architect Josep Puig i Cadafalch’s simplest idea for the ceremonial gateway to Montjuïc at Plaça d’Espanya saw four 20m-high columns erected in 1919 on a raised site below the future Palau Nacional. Who could possibly object? The authoritarian government of General Primo de Rivera, of course, which knew perfectly well that as a Catalan nationalist Puig i Cadafalch intended the columns to represent the four stripes of the senyera, the Catalan flag. Down they came in 1928, to be replaced by the Magic Fountain. Not until 2010 were the columns seen again, reconstructed using the original plans and erected across from the fountain by the city government as both “an act of memory” and a symbol of freedom and democracy.
Font Màgica
Pl. de Carles Buïgas • Mid-Feb to March Fri & Sat 7pm, 7.30pm & 8pm; April, May & Oct Fri & Sat 9pm, 9.30pm & 10pm; June–Sept Thurs–Sun 9.30pm, 10pm & 10.30pm • Free • bcn.es/fontmagica • Espanya
Things were certainly different in 1929, when mere whooshing water was enough to wow the crowds that flocked to the International Exhibition. The Font Màgica (Magic Fountain) at the foot of the Montjuïc steps still does its stuff several evenings each week, forming the centrepiece of what is now an impressive, if slightly kitsch, sound-and-light show, with sprays and sheets of brightly coloured water dancing to the strains of Holst and Abba. The fountain is also the site of a spectacular firework, music and laser show every September, at the close of the annual Mercè festival.
Caixa Forum
Avgda. de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 6–8 • Daily 10am–8pm; July & Aug Wed open until 11pm • Free, fees for some exhibitions • 934 768 600, caixaforum.es • Espanya
A terrific arts and cultural centre, the Caixa Forum stands within a magnificent modernista edifice. Originally built as the Casaramona textile factory by Josep Puig i Cadafalch in 1911, this remarkable building reopened in 2002, following a fifty-year hiatus as a headquarters for police horses and subsequent renovation and expansion under the auspices of the Fundació La Caixa. While its essential external structure was left untouched, with girders, pillars, brickwork and crenellated walls at every turn, twin iron-and-glass canopies representing spreading trees were added at the front, beneath which visitors now descend to enter below street level.
Up on the main floor, a permanent exhibition covers the history and design of the former factory, while the next level up offers access to several distinct pavilion-like gallery spaces. Each usually holds a separate temporary exhibition, on themes ranging from film or fashion to medieval history, though at times they’re combined to stage a single major event. The Fundació La Caixa has sufficient clout, or money, to borrow artefacts from big-name international outfits like the British Museum or the Musée d’Orsay, so you can expect a very high standard.
Riding the elevators one level higher – follow signs to “terrats” – brings you to the factory’s undulating brick-paved roof, which offers views up to Montjuïc. There’s no access however to its tall, emblematic Casaramona tower, etched in blue and yellow tiling.
The complex also includes the Mediateca multimedia space, as well as an arts bookshop, an area devoted to kids’ activities, and a four-hundred-seat auditorium for music, art and literary events, while its indoor-outdoor café serves breakfast and light meals.
Pavelló Mies van der Rohe
Avgda. de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 7, opposite Caixa Forum • Daily: March–Oct 10am–8pm, Nov–Feb 10am–6pm • €5, under-16s free • 934 234 016, miesbcn.com • Espanya
The German contribution to the 1929 International Exhibition, a groundbreaking pavilion designed as a reception room by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, was dismantled a year later. Considered a masterpiece of modern rationalist architecture, the Pavelló Mies van der Rohe was reconstructed in 1986 by Catalan architects.
Standing opposite and slightly uphill from the Caixa Forum, the pavilion is small and easily overlooked. Spare a moment, though, to admire its startlingly beautiful conjunction of hard straight lines with watery surfaces, and dark-green polished onyx alternating with shining glass. While it’s open to visitors, unless a temporary exhibition is in place, there’s little to see inside save Mies van der Rohe’s iconic, tubular steel Barcelona Chair. Still, you can always buy postcards and books from the small shop.
Poble Espanyol
Avgda. de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 13 • Mon 9am–8pm, Tues–Thurs & Sun 9am–midnight, Fri 9am–3am, Sat 9am–4am, workshops daily 10am–6/8pm, depending on season • €14, ages 4–12 €7, under-4s free, family ticket €42, night ticket €7, combined ticket with MNAC €26; all prices discounted online • 935 086 300, poble-espanyol.com • Espanya and 800m walk, or bus #150 or #13 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina
An inspired concept for 1929’s International Exhibition, the Poble Espanyol, or Spanish Village, is a homogeneous self-contained enclave, built in old stone, where various streets and squares hold reconstructions of famous or characteristic buildings from all over Spain. Each little district is dedicated to a specific region, starting with the fairy-tale medieval walls of Ávila through which you enter. “Get to know Spain in one hour” is the promise; it’s all hugely enjoyable, and nothing like as cheesy as you might imagine. You could easily believe, in fact, that it had been here for hundreds of years, an impression helped of course by the fact that it’s now almost a century old.
The echoing main square is lined with cafés, while the surrounding alleys and courtyards contain regionally themed restaurants and bars. There’s also a gallery of twentieth-century art, the Museu Fran Daurel (free, same hours; fundaciofrandaurel.com), which holds a handful of Miro prints plus a fair assortment of etchings, drawings and ceramics by Picasso. Workshops scattered through the village demonstrate crafts like engraving, weaving and glass-blowing, and there are plenty of family activities. Children, who can run free in the absence of traffic, will love it.
Inevitably, the whole place is riddled with shopping opportunities – you can buy everything from castanets to Lladró porcelain, religious icons to Barcelona soccer shirts – but no more so than the original destinations it celebrates.
Arrive early to enjoy the village relatively crowd-free – once the tour groups arrive, it becomes a bit of a scrum. You could always come instead at the other end of the day, when venues such as Tablao de Carmen, which puts on flamenco shows, keep the action going well into the night.
Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC)
Palau Nacional • May–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm; Oct–April Tues–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm • €12, ticket valid for two days within a month, annual pass €18, under-16s & over-65s free; free for everyone Sat 3–8pm & first Sun of the month; charges vary for special exhibitions • 936 220 360, mnac.cat • Espanya/Poble Sec, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina, or bus #55 from C/Lleida
The towering, domed Palau Nacional, set proud on Montjuïc at the top of the long climb up from the Font Màgica, was the flagship building of Barcelona’s 1929 International Exhibition. Used for the opening ceremony, the palace was due to be demolished once the expo was over, but gained a reprieve and ultimately became home to one of Spain’s greatest museums – the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC), showcasing a thousand years of Catalan art in stupendous surroundings.
In such a wide-ranging museum, it can be hard to know where to start. If your time is at all limited, be sure not to miss the medieval collection, which is split into two main sections. One is dedicated to Romanesque art, the other to Gothic; both were periods during which Catalan artists were pre-eminent in Spain. MNAC also has impressive holdings of European Renaissance and Baroque art, as well as an unsurpassed collection of nineteenth- and twentieth-century Catalan art (up until the 1950s; subsequent periods are covered by MACBA in the Raval). In addition, there’s a changing roster of blockbuster exhibitions and special shows based on the museum’s archives. You’ll also find a café-bar and gift shop and art bookshop in the gloriously restored oval hall, a kiosk on the front terrace, and a separate museum restaurant with more sweeping views over the city.
The Romanesque collection
From the eleventh century onwards, as the Christian Reconquest spread across the Iberian peninsula, great numbers of sturdy Romanesque churches were built in the high Catalan Pyrenees. Medieval Catalan studios decorated these churches with extraordinary biblical frescoes, and even the most remote Pyrenean valleys boasted lavish masterpieces. By the nineteenth century, however, many of these churches either lay abandoned or had been ruined by renovations. Finally, in 1919, a concerted effort was made to preserve the frescoes for future generations, by removing them to a museum where they could be better displayed.
Today, the frescoes are magnificently presented in meticulously proportioned nest-like reconstructions of the original interiors, enabling visitors to see exactly where they would have been placed in the church buildings. Most possess a vibrant, raw quality that’s best exemplified by those taken from churches in the Boí valley in the Catalan Pyrenees.
The highlight of the whole astonishing collection comes in room 7, where the extraordinarily powerful Christ in Majesty, painted by the so-called Master of Taüll for the apse of the early twelfth-century church of Sant Climent in Taüll, combines a Byzantine hierarchical composition with the imposing colours and strong outlines of contemporary manuscript illuminators. Look out for details such as the leper, to the left of the altar, patiently allowing a dog to lick his sores. The matching room 9 holds a much larger set of frescoes from the neighbouring church of Santa Maria in Taüll, which rather amazingly was consecrated just one day later, in 1123.
Frescoes from other churches illustrate various themes, from heaven to hell, with the displays complemented by sculptures, altar panels, woodcarvings, religious objects and furniture retrieved from the mouldering churches.
THE BRILLIANT FLOWERING OF CATALAN ART
Between around 1850 and 1940, Catalan art enjoyed a modern golden age. The break-out artist, Marià Fortuny i Marsal, is often regarded as the earliest modernista artist, and was certainly the first Catalan painter to be known widely abroad, thanks to acclaimed exhibitions in Paris and Rome. He specialized in minutely detailed pictures, often of exotic subjects – the showpiece Battle of Tetuan in the MNAC, for example, was the result of his 1859 trip to observe the war in Morocco. The main name in contemporary Catalan Realism was Ramon Martí i Alsina, while the master of nineteenth-century Catalan landscape painting was Joaquim Veyreda i Vila, founder of the “Olot School”, whose members were influenced both by the work of the early Impressionists and by the distinctive volcanic scenery of the Olot region in northern Catalunya.
However, only with the emergence of Ramon Casas i Carbó (whose famous picture of himself and Pere Romeu riding a tandem, as displayed at MNAC, once hung on the walls of Els Quatre Gats) and Santiago Rusiñol i Prats did Catalan art acquire its first contemporary art superstars. They took their cue from the very latest in European styles, whether the symbolism of Whistler or the vibrant social observation of Toulouse-Lautrec. Hot on their heels came a new generation of artists – Josep María Sert, Marià Pidelaserra i Brias, Ricard Canals i Llambí and others – who were strongly influenced by the scene in contemporary Paris. The two brightest stars of the period, though, were Joaquim Mir i Trinxet, whose highly charged landscapes tended towards the abstract, and Isidre Nonell i Monturiol, who from 1902 until his early death in 1911 painted sombre naturalistic studies of impoverished Gypsy communities.
The other dominant contemporary trend was noucentisme, a style at once more classical and less consciously flamboyant than modernisme – witness the portraits and landscapes of Joaquim Sunyer i Miró, perhaps the best known noucentista artist, and the work of sculptors like Pau Gargallo i Catalán.
The Gothic collection
The evolution from the Romanesque to the Gothic period was marked by a move from murals to painting on wood, and by the depiction of more naturalistic figures in scenes showing the lives of the saints, and later in portraits of kings and patrons of the arts.
At first, the Catalan and Valencian schools in particular were influenced by contemporary Italian styles, and you’ll see some outstanding altarpieces, tombs and church decoration. Later came the International Gothic or “1400” style, in which the influences became more widespread; the important figures of this movement were the artists Jaume Huguet (1412–92) and Lluís Dalmau (active 1428–61). Works from the end of this period show the strong influence of contemporary Flemish painting, in the use of denser colours, the depiction of crowd scenes and a concern for perspective.
The last Catalan artist of note here, the so-called Master of La Seu d’Urgell, is represented by several works, including a fine series of six paintings (Christ, the Virgin Mary, saints Peter, Paul and Sebastian and Mary Magdalene) that once formed the covers of an organ.
TEATRE GREC AND THE BARCELONA FESTIVAL
Montjuïc takes centre-stage each year during Barcelona’s annual summer cultural festival (barcelonafestival.com), known locally as the Grec, when arias soar from the open-air stage of the Teatre Grec, a Greek theatre cut into a former quarry on the Poble Sec side of the hill. Running from late June until the end of August, the festival incorporates drama, music and dance, with the opening sessions and many atmospheric events staged in the theatre, from Shakespearean productions to shows by avant-garde performance artists. These can be magical nights – a true Barcelona experience – though you’ll need to be quick off the mark for tickets, which usually go on sale in May.
The Renaissance and Baroque collections
Many of MNAC’s Renaissance and Baroque works have come from private collections bequeathed to the museum, notably by conservative politician Francesc Cambó and Madrid’s Thyssen-Bornemisza. Selections from these bequests are shown in their own rooms within the Renaissance and Baroque galleries, while the other rooms in this section trace artistic development from the early sixteenth to the eighteenth century. Major European artists displayed include Peter Paul Rubens, Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, Jean Honoré Fragonard, Francisco de Goya, El Greco, Lucas Cranach, Francisco de Zurbarán and Diego Velázquez, though the museum is of course keen to play up Catalan works of the period, by the likes of Barcelona artist Antoni Viladomat (1678–1755). However, more familiar to most will be the masterpieces of the Spanish Golden Age, notably Velázquez’s Saint Paul and Zurbarán’s Immaculate Conception.
The modern art collection
MNAC ends on a high note with its unsurpassed nineteenth- and twentieth-century Catalan art collection, which is particularly good on modernista and noucentista painting and sculpture, the two dominant schools of the period. Rooms highlight individual artists and genres, shedding light on the development of art in an exciting period of Catalunya’s history. The works provide a rich, varied experience, ranging from intricate Barcelona street scenes to modernista interior design (including furniture by Gaudí), while there are also fascinating diversions into avant-garde sculpture and historical photography. Salvador Dalí is represented by a couple of paintings, including a portrait of his father from 1925, and there’s a fascinating array of graphic art from the Civil War era.
Museu Etnològic
Pg. de Santa Madrona 16–22 • Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–8pm • #5, under-30s €3.50, under-16s free; free for everyone Sun 4–8pm & first Sun of the month • 932 563 484, www.museuetnologic.bcn.cat • Espanya/Poble Sec, or bus #55 from C/Lleida
In recent years, Barcelona’s ethnological museum, the Museu Etnològic, has divided into two sections. Most of its extensive collection of art and artefacts from around the globe is now on show in the Museu de Cultures del Món in the old town. Its original home, on Montjuïc not far from MNAC, has finally reopened after extensive renovations, however, and is now dedicated exclusively to artefacts from Catalunya.
While the main open-plan hall holds plenty of rural relics, ranging from huts to handlooms, much of its attention is focused on urban traditions that have grown up in Barcelona itself. Prize exhibits include everything from modern gegants – festival giants – to accordions.
The Olympic area
Espanya, then either walk via the hillside escalators behind MNAC or take bus #13 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina or #55 from C/Lleida
The principal area used for the 1992 Olympics, sometimes known as the Anella Olímpica (Olympic Ring), stands high on Montjuïc, well above the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya. These were actually the second Olympics to be planned for this location. The first, in 1936 – the “People’s Olympics” – were organized as an alternative to the Nazis’ infamous Berlin games of that year, but the day before the official opening, Franco’s army revolt triggered the Civil War and scuppered the Barcelona games. Some of the 25,000 athletes and spectators who had turned up stayed on to join the Republican forces.
As well as the stadium itself, and the sports museum, signature buildings in the “Ring” include the steel-and-glass Palau Sant Jordi, a 17,000-seat sports and concert hall, Catalan architect Ricardo Bofill’s Institut Nacional d’Educació Física de Catalunya (INEF; a sports university) and – one building you can visit as a general punter – the impressive Piscines Picornell.
Museu Olímpic i de l’Esport
Avgda. de l’Estadi 60 • April–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm; Oct–March Tues–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm • €5.80, under-7s free • 932 925 379, museuolimpicbcn.com • Espanya then 25min walk, or bus #13 or #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina
Just across the road from the Olympic stadium, the Museu Olímpic i de l’Esport is fronted by a walk of fame featuring footprints from the likes of Nadia Comaneci, Jack Nicklaus and Martina Navratilova. As Barcelona’s moment in the sun recedes into history, it’s become less a celebration of the 1992 games than a general museum of sport itself.
As well as tracing the entire story of the Olympics, including the 1169-year period of the ancient games, it covers everything from bull-jumping in Minoan Crete to cricket in modern Pakistan. It also includes a sizeable section on the Catalan administrator Juan Samaranch, who as President of the International Olympic Committee brought the games to Barcelona; should you wish, you can admire his personal collection of chestnuts. Much more fun are the interactive displays in which you can set your own records in the long or high jump.
The Olympic Stadium
Estadi Olímpic Lluís Companys, Avgda. de l’Estadi • No public access, except during events • 934 252 089, estadiolimpic.cat
Built for the 1929 Exhibition, the Olympic Stadium atop Montjuïc was entirely refitted for the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, while retaining its original Neoclassical facade. Although seventy thousand spectators packed in for the opening and closing ceremonies, its current capacity is around 54,000. Now officially named the Estadi Olímpic Lluís Companys, in honour of the Generalitat president executed on Montjuïc after the Civil War, it’s still used for various sporting events, as well as concerts by the likes of U2.
A vast terrassa on the west side of the stadium provides one of the finest vantage points in the city. Long water-fed troughs break up the concrete and marble expanse, while the confident space-age curve of Santiago Calatrava’s communications tower dominates the skyline.

Fundació Joan Miró
Parc de Montjuïc • April–Oct Tues, Wed, Fri & Sat 10am–8pm, Thurs 10am–9pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm; Nov–March Tues, Wed, Fri & Sat 10am–6pm, Thurs 10am–9pm, Sun & hols 10am–3pm; only open on Mon when a public holiday, in which case 10am–3pm • General admission to all areas €12, otherwise exhibitions €7, Espai 13 €2.50, under-15s free • 934 439 470, fmirobcn.org • Paral.lel, then Funicular de Montjuïc and 5min walk, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina, or #55 from C/Llieda
Barcelona’s most adventurous art museum, the Fundació Joan Miró, celebrates the life’s work of the great Catalan artist Joan Miró (1893–1983), who established an international reputation while always retaining links with his homeland. The stark white modernist museum, designed by Miró’s architect friend Josep Lluís Sert, and set amid lovely gardens, lies just a few minutes’ walk from both the Olympic stadium and the Montjuïc funicular and cable-car stations.
Born in Barcelona in 1893, Miró showed a childlike delight in colours and shapes and developed a free, highly decorative style – his paintings and drawings are instantly recognizable, and are among the chief links between Surrealism and abstract art. Miró had his first exhibition in 1918; met Picasso in Paris during the 1920s; and subsequently spent his summers in Catalunya and the rest of the time in France, before moving to Mallorca in 1956, where he died.
Largely donated by Miró himself, the museum’s huge collection of paintings, graphics, tapestries and sculptures ranges from 1914 up to 1978. Aside from the permanent displays, the Fundació sponsors excellent temporary exhibitions, film shows, lectures and children’s theatre, as well as summer music nights (usually June and July). Young experimental artists have their own space in the Espai 13 gallery, and there’s also a contemporary art library, a bookshop and a pleasant open-air café on the Carob Tree Patio that’s accessible whether or not you pay to get into the museum itself.
The collection
The museum’s two-hundred-plus paintings are largely drawn from Miró’s later years – by the time he started to set works aside for the museum in the 1960s, he had been painting for almost half a century. However, the collection does include early Realist works dating from before he decided to “assassinate art” and abandon figurative painting in the mid-1920s, like his landscapes from Mont.roig in Tarragona, where he returned repeatedly after convalescing from typhoid fever in 1911, and the effervescent Portrait of a Young Girl (1919).
Other gaps are filled by a collection donated by Miró’s widow, Pilar Juncosa, which demonstrates Miró’s preoccupations in the 1930s and 1940s. This was the period when he started his Constellations series, introducing the colours, themes and symbols that, eventually pared down to the minimalist basics, came to define his work: reds and blues; women, birds and tears; the sun, moon and stars. That same period also saw the fifty black-and-white lithographs of the Barcelona Series (1939–44), executed in the immediate aftermath of the Civil War. They are a dark reflection of the turmoil of the period, all snarling faces and great black shapes and shadows.
ON THE MIRÓ TRAIL
Once you’ve seen one Miró, well, you start to spot them everywhere in Barcelona, whether it’s T-shirts for tourists or branding for businesses. There’s the large ceramic mural on the facade of Terminal B at the airport, for a start, or the circular pavement mural at Plaça de la Boqueria that catches your attention every time you stroll down the Ramblas.
Miró also designed the starfish logo for the Caixa de Pensións savings bank and the España logo on Spanish National Tourist Board publications. Then there’s his towering Dona i Ocell (“Woman and Bird’”) in the Parc Joan Miró, near Barcelona Sants train station, while a smaller Dona stands with other Catalan works in the courtyard of the Ajuntament (city hall). In many ways, Barcelona’s a Miró city, whatever Picasso fans might think.
Elsewhere you’ll find several of Miró’s enormous, dense and very shaggy tapestries; his pencil drawings, particularly of misshapen women and gawky ballerinas; film footage of the artist at work on, and setting light to, a canvas in 1973; and sketches and notes including doodles on scraps of newspaper. His sculptures are displayed outdoors, both in the gardens and on the spacious roof terrace.

Castell de Montjuïc
Carretera de Montjuïc 66 • Castle Daily: April–Oct 10am–8pm; Nov–March 10am–6pm • €5, under-16s free, Sun free for everyone after 3pm • Grounds Daily: April–Oct 9am–9pm; Nov–March 9am–7pm • Free • 932 564 440, bcn.cat/castelldemontjuic • Direct access by Telefèric de Montjuïc, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina
The best way to reach the castle at the very top of Montjuïc is via the Telefèric de Montjuïc. The cable car tacks up the hillside before depositing you just outside the forbidding red-brick walls of the eighteenth-century fortress itself. It’s worth coming up here simply to admire the dramatic location, and to enjoy the superb views out over the port from the grounds, which are free to enter.
Paying admission to the castle buys you marginally better views, especially from its surprisingly broad ramparts, but more importantly gives access to fascinating displays on its history and significance. Finally handed over to the city in 2008, the fortress had long been a symbol of Barcelona’s occupation by a foreign power – the Spanish state. After all, it had served for decades as a military base and prison, with its mighty cannon trained on the city down below, and it was here that the last president of the prewar Generalitat, Lluís Companys i Jover, was executed on Franco’s orders on October 15, 1940. Companys had been in exile in Paris after the Civil War, but was handed over to Franco by the Germans upon their capture of the French capital; he’s buried in the nearby Cementiri del Sud-Oest. Small wonder, therefore, that the captions in the castle’s interpretation centre refer to it as “hated for centuries”.
Camí del Mar and Mirador del Migdia
Below the castle ramparts, a panoramic pathway – the Camí del Mar – has been cut from the cliff edge, providing further magnificent views, first across to Port Olímpic and the northern beaches, and then southwest as the path swings around the castle. This is an unfamiliar view of Barcelona, of the sprawling docks and container yards, with cruise ships and tankers usually visible negotiating the busy sea lanes.
Just over 1km long, the path ends at the back of the castle battlements near the Mirador del Migdia, where there’s a great open-air bar, La Caseta del Migdia. Down through the trees is the mirador itself, a balcony with extensive views over the Baix Llobregat industrial area. You can see across to the Olympic stadium from here, while in the immediate foreground the Cementiri del Sud-Oest stretches along the ridge below, with its tombs stacked like apartment blocks along great conifer-lined avenues.
Jardí Botànic de Barcelona
C/Dr Font i Quer 2 • Daily: April–Sept 10am–7pm; Oct–March 10am–5pm • €3.50, or €7 combined ticket with Museu Blau, under-16s free, free for everyone Sun after 3pm & all day first Sun of the month • 932 564 160, museuciencies.bcn.cat • Espanya, then 20min walk via escalators, or bus #150 from Avgda. de la Reina María Cristina or #55 from C/Lleida
Principal among Montjuïc’s many gardens is the Jardí Botànic de Barcelona, laid out on terraced slopes that offer fine views across the city. It’s a beautifully kept, contemporary botanical garden, where wide, easy-to-follow paths (fine for buggies, strollers and wheelchairs) wind through landscaped zones representing the flora of the Mediterranean, Canary Islands, California, Chile, South Africa and Australia. Just don’t come in the full heat of summer, as there’s very little shade. Guided tours in Spanish/Catalan every weekend (except Aug) show you the highlights, but an English-language booklet is included in the entry fee.
THE GARDENS OF MONTJUÏC
Botanical gardens aside, Montjuïc holds plenty of places where you can roll out a picnic rug or let the children scamper around safely.
Signposted off Avinguda de Miramar, west of (and below) the Fundació Joan Miró, the terraces, clipped hedges and grottoes of the Jardins de Laribal (daily 10am–dusk; free) date from 1918. They surround the spring of Font del Gat, which has been a picnic site since the nineteenth century. Josep Puig i Cadafalch built a restaurant here of the same name for the 1929 International Exhibition, and it’s open now for lunch (Tues–Fri 10am–6pm, Sat & Sun noon–6pm; 932 890 404, lafontdelgat.com), with wonderful views from its terrace. A little higher up, between the Ethnology and Sports museums, the verdant Jardins de Joan Maragall, open on weekend afternoons only (Sat & Sun 10am–3pm), surround the grand Neoclassical Palauet Albéniz, which was built as the official Barcelona residence of the Spanish royal family.
Further east, the Montjuïc cable car passes over the Jardins de Mossèn Cinto Verdaguer and adjacent Jardins de Joan Brossa (both daily 10am–dusk; free), which tack up the hillside to the castle. Walking down through the gardens from the castle makes a pleasant way to return to the lower slopes of Montjuïc, through the site of the former Montjuïc amusement park, now fully landscaped with children’s play areas. Halfway down, the Mirador de l’Alcalde offers sweeping city views.
Outside the upper cross-harbour cable-car station, you’ll find the formal Jardins de Miramar (always open; free), plus more fine views from the cable-car station café-terrassa. Steps nearby lead down into the precipitous cactus gardens of the Jardins de Mossèn Costa i Llobera (daily 10am–dusk; free), which look out over the port. The flourishing stands of Central and South American, Indian and African cacti, some over 6m high, make a dramatic scene experienced by few visitors to Montjuïc, though as the crowds lounging on the steps and in the shade of the bigger specimens suggest, it’s an open secret among locals.
Museu de Carrosses Fúnebres
C/Mare de Déu de Port 56–58 • Sat & Sun 10am–2pm • Free • 934 841 999, cbsa.cat/colleccio • Bus #21 from Paral.lel
Unfortunately open on weekends only, for limited hours, the esoteric Museu de Carrosses Fúnebres (Funerary Carriage Museum) stands at the entrance to Montjuïc cemetery. The horse-drawn carriages on display were used for city funeral processions from the 1830s until the service was mechanized in the 1950s, when the silver Buick that’s also on show came into use. Most of the carriages and hearses are extravagantly decorated in gilt, black or white; some, such as the Grand Doumont and the Stove, carried dignitaries, politicians and big-name bullfighters to their final resting places. There are also plenty of old photographs, alongside antique uniforms, mourning wear and formal riding gear. Free guided tours start at noon on Saturdays (Spanish/Catalan).
Museu d’Arqueologia de Catalunya
Pg. de Santa Madrona 39–41 • Tues–Sat 9.30am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm • €4.50, under-25s €3.50, under-8s free • 934 232 149, mac.cat • Espanya/Poble Sec, or bus #55 from C/Lleida
Though it’s somewhat off the beaten track, down near the foot of Montjuïc at the edge of Poble Sec, the Museu d’Arqueologia de Catalunya is something no one interested in the early and classical-era history of what’s now known as Catalunya should miss. Spanning the centuries from the Stone Age to the time of the Visigoths, its rich collection centres on dramatic finds from the region’s most famous archeological sites.
As few captions are translated from Catalan, it’s well worth picking up the free audio-guide before you begin. The human story kicks off forty thousand years ago, with early highlights including stunning cave paintings, and continues with reconstructed burial sites such as the megalithic Dolmen del Collet de Su and the Bronze Age cave of Montanisell, discovered in 2004.

CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT FUNDACIÓ JOAN MIRÓ; FONT MÀGICA; MONTJUÏC CABLE CAR

One section traces the rise and fall of the original Iberian culture, which flourished between 660 BC and 200 AD; look out for the gruesome human skull with a nail driven through it, thought to have been displayed on the walls of some ancient settlement. There’s also some fine Egyptian glassware and Roman mosaic work, while the upper floor records life in Roman Barcino itself, via tombstones, statues, inscriptions and friezes found all over the city.
La Ciutat del Teatre
C/Lleida • Poble Sec
At the foot of Montjuïc, on the eastern slopes, the theatre area known as La Ciutat del Teatre occupies a back corner of the old working-class neighbourhood of Poble Sec. Direct steps descend the hillside, while Passeig de Santa Madrona runs down here from MNAC, passing the archeological museum.
The theatre buildings that make up La Ciutat del Teatre sit in a tight huddle off C/Lleida. Here you’ll find the Mercat de les Flors – once a flower market, now a centre for dance and the “movement arts” – and progressive Teatre Lliure, “Free Theatre”, occupying the spaghetti-western-style Palau de l’Agricultura premises built for the 1929 Exhibition.
Walk through the terracotta arch from C/Lleida, and off to the left is the far sleeker Institut del Teatre, which brings together the city’s major drama and dance schools, along with various conservatories, libraries and study centres. The sheer walls of the gleaming Theatre City form a marked contrast with the neighbourhood’s low-cost housing just metres away, draped with hanging laundry.
Poble Sec
Poble Sec/Paral.lel
Lying immediately below Montjuïc, confined by the hill on one side and the busy Avinguda del Paral.lel on the other, the neighbourhood of Poble Sec, or “Dry Village”, is so-called because it had no water supply until the nineteenth century. It’s a complete contrast to the landscaped slopes that rise above – a grid of contoured narrow streets, down-to-earth grocery stores, bakeries, local shops and good-value restaurants. Asian immigrants have stamped their mark on many of the neighbourhood stores and businesses, while Poble Sec is also emerging as an “off-Raval” nightlife destination, with its fashionable bars and music clubs – pedestrianized Carrer de Blai is the focal point of the scene.

Refugi 307
C/Nou de la Rambla 175 • Guided visits Sun 10.30am (English), 11.30am (Spanish) & 12.30pm (Catalan); otherwise only open to groups with advance reservations • €3.40 • 932 562 100, museuhistoria.bcn.cat • Paral.lel
Many visitors never set foot in Poble Sec, though one of the city’s old Civil War air-raid shelters provides a compelling reason to make the short journey across town. Refugi 307 was dug into the Montjuïc hillside by local people from 1936 onwards, and its 200m of tunnels could shelter up to two thousand people from Franco’s bombing raids. With no radar to protect the city, they had two minutes from the first sound of the sirens to get underground. To take a tour, you can simply turn up on Sunday morning. Photographic storyboards at the start of the tour provide a bit of background, and then it’s hard hat on to follow your guide into the labyrinth, all to the sound of screaming sirens and droning warplanes.
A CITY UNDER SIEGE
During the Civil War, Poble Sec – like many inner-city neighbourhoods – suffered grievously from Nationalist bombing raids, a foretaste of what was to come elsewhere in Europe during World War II. From 1936 onwards, the city authorities oversaw the construction of communal air-raid shelters, many of which were ready by the time the first raids hit Barcelona early in 1937. Most were constructed in working-class areas like Poble Sec, Barceloneta and Gràcia, where locals hadn’t been able to leave the city or couldn’t reach the relative safety of either the metro tunnels or the Collserola hills.
Altogether, around 1400 shelters were built in Barcelona, plus another two thousand across Catalunya. While some were as simple as reinforced cellars, many, like Refugi 307, were larger efforts that featured vaulted brick-lined tunnels, ventilation, water supplies and even infirmaries and play areas. The raids were particularly savage in March 1938, and by the end of the war had killed three thousand inhabitants, with many more injured and thousands of buildings destroyed. Even so, the shelters undoubtedly saved many lives. In the wake of Republican defeat, after the war, many shelters were forgotten, but these days the city authorities are keen to raise their profile in remembrance of Barcelona’s often overlooked wartime history.
< Back to Montjuïc



Dreta de l’Eixample

Casa Lleó Morera
Pg. de Gràcia 35 • Currently closed • 936 762 733, casalleomorera.com • Passeig de Gràcia
Designed by Lluís Domènech i Montaner and completed in 1905, the six-storey Casa Lleó Morera is the least obviously extravagant building in the “Block of Discord”, and has suffered the most from depredations wrought by subsequent owners. The original arches and sculptures have long since been removed from its ground floor – Salvador Dalí bought some – which is now occupied by the luxury leather goods store Loewe. In the words of Robert Hughes, “No one who cares for architecture should ever buy anything from Loewe, on principle”.
Until recently, the wonderful Art Nouveau interior could be seen on regular guided tours; its sheer scale and opulence are quite extraordinary. Sadly, though, the house is currently being “re-designed” by developers Nuñez & Navarro. Few locals hold out hope that it will survive that process intact, let alone reopen to the public.

Museu del Perfum
Pg. de Gràcia 39 • Mon–Fri 10.30am–8pm, Sat 11am–2pm • €5 • 932 160 121, museodelperfume.com • Passeig de Gràcia
There’s no missing the Museu del Perfum; walk anywhere near the Regia perfume store in which it’s sited, and you’ll be overwhelmed by the cloying pong. They’ll probably have to turn the lights on for you to enter the museum itself, though, located in a back room and devoted to an exquisite collection of perfume vessels and containers rather than to their contents. These range from tiny ceramic and alabaster jars from ancient Egypt and Carthage, via Roman glass, up to Turkish filigree-and-crystal ware and bronze and silver Indian elephant flasks. More recent eras are represented by scents made for Grace Kelly and Elizabeth Taylor, and if you’re diligent enough to scan all the shelves you should spot the “Sun King” bottles designed by Salvador Dalí.

Jardins de la Torre de les Aigües
C/Roger de Llúria 56, between C/Consell de Cent and C/Diputació • Daily 10am–dusk, Aug & Sept Sat & Sun until 3pm • Free • Girona
The nineteenth-century Eixample urban plan was drawn up with local inhabitants very much in mind. Space, light and social community projects were integral to the grand design, and something of the original municipal spirit can be seen in the Jardins de la Torre de les Aigües, an enclosed square (reached down a herringbone-brick tunnel) that centres on a Moorish-style water tower. Handsomely restored by the city council, it turns into a backyard family beach every summer, complete with sand and paddling pool.
Another example of the old Eixample lies directly opposite, across C/Roger de Llúria, where the cobbled Passatge del Permanyer cuts across an Eixample block, lined by candy-coloured single-storey townhouses.
Mercat de la Concepció and around
Between C/València and C/Aragó • July & Aug Mon–Sat 8am–3pm, Sept–June Mon & Sat 8am–3pm, Tues–Fri 8am–8pm • laconcepcio.cat • Girona
The Dreta’s finest neighbourhood market, the Mercat de la Concepció, was inaugurated in 1888, its iron-and-glass tram-shed structure reminiscent of others in the city. Flowers, shrubs, trees and plants are a Concepció speciality, and the florists on C/València stay open 24 hours a day. As well as a couple of good snack bars inside the market, there are a few outdoor cafés to the side.
La Concepció
C/Aragó 299, entrance on C/Roger de Llúria • Daily 7.30am–1pm & 5–9pm • Free • Girona
The quiet cloister of the church of La Concepció, a block west of its namesake market, is a surprising haven of slender columns and orange trees. Part of a fifteenth-century Gothic convent that originally stood in the old town, the church was transferred here brick by brick during the 1870s, along with the Romanesque belfry from another old-town church.
Palau Montaner
C/Mallorca 278 • Not open to visitors; check for updates on rutadelmodernisme.com • Passeig de Gràcia
The Palau Montaner was built in 1896 for the Montaner i Simon publishing family. After the original architect quit, modernista architect Lluís Domènech i Montaner took over halfway through construction, which explains why the top half of the facade is more elaborate than the lower part. Meanwhile, the period’s most celebrated craftsmen were set to work on the interior, which sports rich mosaic floors, painted glass, carved woodwork and a monumental staircase. Now the seat of the Madrid government’s delegation to Catalunya, the building is not currently open to visitors.

Casa Ramon Casas
Pg. de Gràcia 96 • Mon–Sat 10am–10pm • 932 156 050 • Diagonal
Next to La Pedrera, the Casa Ramon Casas (1899) was built as a house and studio for the wealthy Barcelona artist Ramon Casas i Carbó (1866–1932). He had found early success in Paris with friends Santiago Rusiñol and Miquel Utrillo, and the trio were later involved in Els Quatre Gats tavern, which Casas largely financed.
For 75 years, the house was occupied by the prestigious furniture and design store Vinçon. In 2015, however, it was taken over by the fashion store Massimo Dutti, and restored to show off its modernista glories. An open-air terrace on the second floor offers views of the interior of La Pedrera, while Casas’ original studio holds a gallery that puts on excellent temporary exhibitions.

Palau Robert
Pg. de Gràcia 107 • Mon–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm • Free • 932 388 091, palaurobert.gencat.cat • Diagonal
Catalunya’s regional information centre, inside the Palau Robert at the top of Passeig de Gràcia, hosts changing exhibitions on all matters Catalan, from art to business. Both the main palace – built as a typical aristocratic residence in 1903 – and its former coach house hold exhibition spaces, while the centre is also an important concert venue for recitals and orchestras. The pretty gardens around the back make a popular meeting point for local nannies and their charges.
Palau Baró de Quadras
Avgda. Diagonal 373 • No public access • Diagonal
Neo-Gothic palace or modernista apartment building? How you categorize the beautifully detailed Palau Baró de Quadras – a Josep Puig i Cadafalch structure from 1904 that’s home to the Institut Ramon Llull, promoting the Catalan language – depends on how you approach it. With intricate carvings, an ornate balcony and mansard roof, the Avinguda Diagonal facade takes a cue from northern European palaces. The building’s Carrer del Rosselló side is decorated in a more subdued, but very lovely, modernista style.
Casa de les Punxes
Avgda. Diagonal 420 • Daily 9am–8pm • €12.50, under-19s €11.25, under-7s free; guided tours on demand, €20 • 930 185 242, casadelespunxes.com • Verdaguer
Architect Josep Puig i Cadafalch’s largest work, the soaring Casa Terrades, is thanks to its red-tiled turrets and steep gables more usually known as the Casa de les Punxes (House of Spikes). Built in 1903 for three sisters, and converted from three separate houses spreading around an entire corner of a block, the crenellated structure is almost northern European in style, reminiscent of a Gothic castle.
Sadly, successive occupants stripped the building’s interior of almost all of its original furnishings and embellishments. The ground floor now simply holds a gift shop, while self-guided tours of the empty apartments above start with an inane multi-media retelling of the legend of St George and the dragon; you can only leave each room once its video stops playing.
Eventually, though, you reach informative panels about Cadafalch and his work, and can then ride the elevator to the roof terrace, where the individual turrets, which hold up to four storeys each, contain further displays. The St George theme owes to the fact that Cadafalch crowned one facade – on C/del Roselló – with a painted-tile image of Catalunya’s patron saint.
< Back to Dreta de l’Eixample



Esquerra de l’Eixample

Universitat de Barcelona
Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 585, at Pl. de la Universitat • Universitat
Erected in the 1860s, the grand Neoclassical main building of the Universitat de Barcelona is now largely used for ceremonies and administrative purposes, but no one will mind if you stroll through the doors. There’s usually an exhibition in the echoing main hall, while two fine arcaded courtyards beyond, plus extensive gardens, provide a welcome escape from the traffic hereabouts.

Sala Fundación MAPFRE
C/Diputació 250 • Mon 2–8pm, Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun 11am–7pm • €3 • See website for schedule of guided tours, Mon–Thurs only, Catalan and Spanish only • 934 012 603, fundacionmapfre.org • Passeig de Gràcia
The Casa Garriga i Nogués, a handsomely restored modernista mansion half a block west of Rambla de Catalunya, which until recently displayed the art collection of former racing driver Francisco Godia, now hosts temporary arts exhibitions as the Sala Fundación MAPFRE. It’s an impressive gallery space, spread over two floors, but whether you choose to visit will depend entirely on whatever happens to be on show.

Mercat del Ninot and around
C/Mallorca 133 • Mon–Sat 8am–9.15pm • 933 234 909, mercatdelninot.com • Hospital Clinic
One of the oldest markets in the city, the colossal Mercat del Ninot takes up a large area between carrers Villaroel and Casanova. Built in 1892, it has recently reopened following major refurbishment. Everything is gleaming and spotless, with stalls and cafés at street level and a Mercadona supermarket downstairs. While it’s not really a tourist destination, it’s a great spot to pick up a snack.
Escola del Treball
Corner of C/Comte d’Urgell and C/Rosselló • escoladeltreball.org • Hospital Clinic
West of the Mercat del Ninot, around the back of the massive Hospital Clinic, it’s worth taking a look at the Escola del Treball, converted in 1908 from buildings of the former Batlló textile mill. It occupies four entire Eixample blocks, with later academic buildings added in the 1920s, including a chapel by Joan Rubió i Bellvér, who worked with Antoni Gaudí. Students usually fill the courtyards, and you’re free to take a stroll through to view the highly decorative buildings.
Museu i Centre d’Estudis de l’Esport
C/Buenos Aires 56–58 • Currently closed for restoration • 934 192 232 • Hospital Clinic
The quirky Museu i Centre d’Estudis de l’Esport, a low-key museum devoted to the sporting history of Catalunya, is at the time of writing undergoing refurbishment. Assuming it reopens in similar shape, it’s primarily of interest for the building in which it stands – a villa that was built as a private house by Josep Puig i Cadafalch in 1911, and has the incongruous look of an Alpine inn.
Parc de l’Espanya Industrial
C/Muntades 37 • Daily 10am–dusk • Free • Sants Estació
If you have time to kill at Barcelona Sants station, nip around the south side to Basque architect Luis Peña Ganchegui’s urban park, the Parc de l’Espanya Industrial. Built on the site of an old textile factory, it has a line of red-and-yellow-striped lighthouses at the top of glaring white steps, with an incongruously classical Neptune in the water below. Altogether, six sculptors are represented – Andrés Nagel was responsible for the enormous dragon – and, along with the boating lake, café-kiosk, playground and sports facilities provided, the park takes a decent stab at reconciling local interests with the mundane nature of the surroundings.
Parc Joan Miró
C/Tarragona 74 • Daily 10am–dusk • Free • Tarragona
Laid out on the site of Barcelona’s nineteenth-century municipal slaughterhouse, Parc Joan Miró features a raised piazza whose only feature is Joan Miró’s gigantic, 22m-tall mosaic sculpture Dona i Ocell (“Woman and Bird”), towering above a shallow reflecting pool. It’s a familiar symbol if you’ve studied Miró’s other works, but the sculpture is known locally by several other names – all of them easy to guess when you consider its erect, helmeted shape.
The rear of the park is given over to games areas and landscaped sections of palms and firs, with a kiosk café and outdoor tables among the trees. The children’s playground here is among the best in the city, with a climbing frame and aerial runway as well as swings and slides.
Arenas de Barcelona
Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 373–385, at Pl. d’Espanya • Daily 10am–10pm • 932 890 244, arenasdebarcelona.com • Espanya
The landmark building on the north side of Plaça d’Espanya is the fabulous Moorish-style bullring, the Arenas de Barcelona, originally constructed in 1900 but reopened as a swish shopping and leisure centre in 2011. Conceived by architect Richard Rogers as a gateway to the city centre, and preserving the beautiful brick exterior, the various retail levels at Arenas are hung in sweeping circular galleries, while right on top, outside, a wide walk-around promenade circles the dome that offers 360-degree views of the western side of the city. An express elevator whisks you up here from street level, or you can take the glass lifts or escalators inside, through four floors of shopping and entertainment that include a cinema, gym and health centre, and several restaurants, some of which are on the top-floor promenade.
Casa de la Papallona
C/Llança 20 • No public access • Espanya
It’s worth walking around the Arenas de Barcelona and craning your neck up to the top of the six-storey Casa Fajol, universally known as the Casa de la Papallona (1912). The work of architect Josep Graner i Prat (1844–1930), it’s crowned by a huge ceramic butterfly (papallona) made using the favoured modernista technique of trencadís, or broken coloured tiles formed to make a picture.
< Back toEsquerra de l’Eixample

Sagrada Família and Glòries
it’s well worth checking out the lesser-known modernista-era buildings nearby, and above all the enchanting pavilions of the Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau

Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau
C/Sant Antoni María Claret 167, at C/Independència • April–Oct Mon–Sat 10am–6.30pm, Sun 10am–2.30pm; Nov–March Mon–Sat 10am–4.30pm, Sun 10am–2.30pm; 1hr 15min English-language tours daily all year 11am • Self-guided €14, guided €19, under-12s free • 932 537 801, santpaubarcelona.org • Hospital de Sant Pau
Lluís Domènech i Montaner’s modernista public hospital, the Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau, is possibly Barcelona’s one piece of architecture that can rival the Sagrada Família for size and invention. A huge precinct of dazzling Art Nouveau imagination, devoted to secular rather than spiritual ends, it has its own metro stop, but it’s much better to approach by walking up the four-block Avinguda de Gaudí from the Sagrada Família, which gives terrific views back over the spires of the church.
Domènech i Montaner started work on the project in 1902, with the brief of replacing the medieval Santa Creu hospital in the Raval. He created an astonishing complex of pavilions, at once practical and playful, topped by golden-tiled domes, festooned with turrets and towers, and covered with sculpture, mosaics, stained glass and ironwork. They’re set just far enough apart not to overshadow each other, in what was originally a botanic garden and is now a single precinct replete with orange and lavender trees.
The hospital finally closed in 2009, with its patients moving to an adjoining new hospital, and the complex reopened to visitors in 2014. Of the 48 pavilions Domènech i Montaner originally envisaged, 27 were completed; twelve now constitute a World Heritage Site, of which six have so far benefited from a €100 million restoration programme. While still primarily noteworthy for their exterior decoration, they’re being progressively filled with display panels and exhibits, some of which are devoted to explaining the details and history of the ensemble. The pick of the bunch is what was the main administration building, which has an ornate Gothic-style chapel upstairs, kitted out with Art Nouveau tiles and floral mosaics, and is also used for conferences and concerts.
There’s also a good café/restaurant alongside the main entrance.
Palau Macaya
Pg. de Sant Joan 108 • Courtyard access only • Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 4–8pm • Free • 934 579 531, obrasocial.lacaixa.es • Verdaguer
Josep Puig i Cadafalch’s palatial Palau Macaya, four blocks west of the Sagrada Família, dates from 1898–1900. It’s a superbly ornamental building with an attractive Gothic-inspired courtyard and canopied staircase from which griffins spring. Pause as you pass by to view the unusual exterior carvings by modernista craftsman Eusebi Arnau i Mascort, including the angel with a “box” Brownie camera and the sculptor himself cycling to work. Today the Palau is run as a cultural centre by the Fundació La Caixa, and hosts conferences and classes as well as, usually free, exhibitions.
Casa Planells
Avgda. Diagonal 332 • No public access • Monumental/Sagrada Família
Built in 1923–24, the Casa Planells apartment block – a sinuous solution to an acute-corner building – simplifies many of the themes that Gaudí emphasized in his work. It’s actually by Josep María Jujol i Gilbert, who was one of Gaudí’s early collaborators, responsible not only for La Pedrera’s iconic undulating balconies but also much of Park Güell’s celebrated mosaic work.
Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes
Glòries
All Barcelona’s major avenues meet at the Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes, a glorified roundabout that’s dedicated to the “Catalan glories”, from architecture to literature. Long a focal point for the city’s regeneration plans, it’s been undergoing work for several years now, with the ultimate intention being to tunnel traffic underground, and open up a grand pedestrianized park centring on the Museu del Disseny.
Glòries is already positioned as a gateway to the Diagonal Mar district, with trams running there down Avinguda Diagonal. Meanwhile, the roundabout also holds French architect Jean Nouvel’s cigar-shaped Torre Agbar (142m), erected in 2005 as the headquarters of the local water company (Aigües de Barcelona). A highly distinctive aluminium-and-glass tower that has no fewer than four thousand multicoloured windows, and glows blue and orange at night, its shape is reminiscent of London’s “Gherkin”, but was inspired by the rocky protuberances of Montserrat.
The huge Glòries shopping mall lies across the Diagonal from here, while further across the Gran Via the park and play areas of the tree-shaded Parc del Clot show what can be achieved in an urban setting within the remains of a razed factory site.
MODERNISME’S CRAFTY COLLABORATORS
Despite the overwhelming noise of the big-gun architects of the period, modernisme was often a true collaborative effort between the architects and their craftsmen and artisans. Lluís Domènech i Montaner, in particular, recognized the importance of ensemble working, and established a pioneering craft workshop in the Castell dels Tres Dragons, which he designed initially as a restaurant for the Universal Exhibition of 1888. Antoni Gaudí, too, always worked with skilled craftsmen, including his longtime collaborator – a master of mosaic decoration – Josep María Jujol i Gilbert (1879–1949).
Another significant figure, Eusebi Arnau i Mascort (1864–1933), provided meticulous carvings for all the main modernista architects – much loved are his quirky figures adorning Josep Puig i Cadafalch’s Casa Macaya and the tour-de-force carved fireplace in the Raval’s Hotel Espanya.
Some projects brought together the cream of craft talent. Thus the glorious stained glass by Antoni Rigalt and elaborate facade sculpture by Miquel Blay form an integral part of Domènech i Montaner’s Palau de la Música Catalana. Meanwhile, the stunning private houses built for wealthy captains of industry looked as good on the inside as they did on the outside, filled with furniture by modernista craftsmen like cabinet-maker extraordinaire Joan Busquets i Jané (1874–1949) and artist and interior designer Gaspar Homar i Mezquida (1870–1955).
Museu del Disseny
Pl. de les Glòries Catalanes 37–38 • Museu del Disseny Tues–Sun 10am–8pm Disseny Hub Mon 4–8.30pm, Tues–Sun 10am–8.30pm • Museum €6, under-16s free, entrance to Hub free; free for everyone Sun 3–8pm & all day on first Sun of month • 932 566 800, museudeldisseny.cat • Glòries
Barcelona’s showpiece Museu del Disseny (Design Museum) gathers what used to be the separate collections of the city’s decorative arts, ceramics, textile and clothing, and graphic arts museums into a single, stunning new building, the Disseny Hub. Nicknamed La Grapadora (“The Stapler”) after its shape, the building consists of two parts: a narrow, zinc-plated above-ground section whose topmost floors cantilever over the motorway; and a wide base housing temporary exhibitions, a library, a cafeteria and, below street level, the headquarters of local design institutions.
As for the exhibits, it’s effectively several distinct museums in one. Of the four upper floors, the first most closely corresponds to what you might expect of a design museum, displaying everyday objects, largely of Catalan origin, that range from chairs, tables and bicycles to toilets and, yes, staplers. The second floor holds a rather random but unarguably beautiful assortment of decorative arts from the third century onwards, starting with Coptic textiles from Egypt and winding up with ceramic works by Picasso and Miró. Next comes a floor devoted to fashion, illustrating how clothing has successively increased, reduced, accentuated and revealed various body shapes over the past five centuries, while the top floor traces the history of graphic design in twentieth-century Barcelona.
Teatre Nacional de Catalunya
Pl. de les Arts 1 • Guided tours Wed & Thurs 11am & 12.30pm; €8; reservations required • 933 065 747, visites@tnc.cat, tnc.cat • Glòries or tram T4
Designed by local architect Ricardo Bofill and inaugurated in 1997, the Teatre Nacional de Catalunya – Catalunya’s national theatre, southwest of Glòries – is a soaring, postmodern glass box, encased within a faux-Greek temple on a raised dais. Reserve in advance by phone or email, and you can take an hour-long guided backstage tour, while the bar and restaurant are open in the evening – a summer evening’s drink on the open-air terrassa is a nice way to take in the grandiose surroundings.
TREASURE-HUNTING AT ELS ENCANTS VELLS
A treasure trove of dusty delights, Barcelona’s flea market, El Encants Vells, is adjacent to the Teatre Nacional de Catalunya at Avgda. Meridiana 69 (Mon, Wed, Fri & Sat 9am–8pm, plus public auctions Mon, Wed & Fri 7.15–8.30am; encantsbcn.com; Glòries). Several levels of open-air treasure-hunting action are protected by a gleaming metallic canopy.
Despite its recent move into this shiny new home, the market retains its street-bazaar vibe. You name it, you can buy it: old sewing machines, cheese graters, photograph albums, cutlery, lawnmowers, clothes, shoes, CDs, antiques, furniture and out-and-out junk. It’s best in the early morning, and haggling for any “old charms” (encants vells) you might fancy is de rigueur, but you’re up against experts.
L’Auditori and the Museu de la Música
L’Auditori C/Lepant 150 • auditori.cat Museu de la Música C/Padilla 155 • Tues, Wed & Fri 10am–6pm, Thurs 10am–9pm, Sat & Sun 10am–7pm • €6, under-16s free; free for everyone Sun 3–7pm & all day on first Sun of month • 932 563 650, www.museumusica.bcn.cat • Glòries/Marina
Forming a sort of cultural enclave with the national theatre, one block over, L’Auditori is the city’s contemporary concert hall, an unlovely modern building whose concrete and metal exterior has seen better days. Housed within the same complex, the Museu de la Música displays a remarkable collection of instruments and musical devices from around the world, from serpentine seventeenth-century horns to reel-to-reel cassette decks.
It’s all very impressive, with soaring glass-walled cases letting you view the pieces from all sides, and the objects themselves are undeniably beautiful. For the non-expert, however, it struggles to engage, partly because of the sheer number and variety of instruments and partly because of the impenetrable commentary, with sections called things like “The humanist spirit and the predominance of polyphony”. Still, there’s a bit of big-screen Elvis here and African drumming there, and if you’ve ever wanted to pluck tunelessly at a harp without anyone shouting at you to stop, this is your chance.
< Back to Sagrada Família and Glòries

Gràcia, Park Güell and Horta
Before it was finally annexed as a city suburb in the late nineteenth century, Gràcia, the closest neighbourhood to the Eixample, had long maintained its identity as a village. It retains a genuine small-town atmosphere, distinct from the old-town neighbourhoods, while its cultural scene and nightlife counter the notion that Barcelona begins and ends on the Ramblas. The one unmissable attraction, though, lies on the slopes on the neighbourhood’s northern flank – the surreal Park Güell, created by architectural genius Antoni Gaudí. Meanwhile, nearby Horta (“garden”), so-called thanks to the gardens and country estates that once characterized the area, holds two further distinctive parks – Creueta del Coll, a prime example of the new urban projects that have revitalized forgotten corners of the city, and the eighteenth-century Parc del Laberint, where a renowned maze speaks of a very different era.

Gràcia
Still very much the liberal, almost bohemian, stronghold it was in the nineteenth century, the northern neighbourhood of Gràcia feels set apart from the city in many ways. Its traditional annual summer festival, August’s Festa Major – a solid week of concerts, parades, fireworks and parties – has no peer in any other neighbourhood, and although actual sights in Gràcia are few and far between, it’s well known for its cinemas, bars and restaurants. Wander the narrow, gridded streets, park yourself on a bench under a plane tree, catch a film, grab a beer or otherwise take time out from the rigours of city-centre life – you’ll soon get the feel of a neighbourhood that, unlike some in Barcelona, has a genuine soul.

ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE: GRÀCIA
By bus Buses #22 or #24 from Pl. de Catalunya run to Gràcia, stopping on the main C/Gran de Gràcia.
By metro and train The most convenient metro stations are Diagonal (south), Fontana (north) or Joanic (east), or take the FGC train from Pl. de Catalunya to Gràcia station.
On foot Gràcia is a 30min walk from Pl. de Catalunya. From any of the neighbourhood stations, it’s around a 500m walk to Gràcia’s central squares.
Mercat de la Llibertat
Pl. Llibertat 27 • Mon–Fri 8am–8.30pm, Sat 8am–3pm • 932 170 995, mercatsbcn.com • Fontana or FGC Gràcia
It’s only logical to start a visit to Gràcia where the locals start, first thing in the morning – shopping for bread and provisions in the Mercat de la Llibertat, a block west of C/Gran de Gràcia. The building was first revamped in 1893 by a former pupil of Gaudí, Francesc Berenguer i Mestrès, who sheltered its food stalls beneath a modernista wrought-iron roof. It’s since been beautifully restored once more, and is always worth a walk through, especially if you fancy the breakfast of champions – oysters, grilled razor clams and a glass of cava – available from one of the classy stand-up café counters.
Casa Vicens
C/Carolines 24 • Due to open to visitors within the lifetime of this book; see website for hours and prices • casavicens.org • Fontana
Antoni Gaudí’s first major private commission, the Casa Vicens (1883–85), stands on the northern edge of Gràcia. Here he took inspiration from the Moorish style, covering the facade in linear green-and-white tiles with a flower motif. The decorative iron railings are a reminder of Gaudí’s early training as a metalsmith, while to further prove his versatility – and how Art Nouveau cuts across art forms – Gaudí also designed much of the mansion’s furniture.
Until 2014, the house remained a private residence. At press time, however, new owners MoraBanc had announced that it would be opened to the public in the near future. Once extensive renovation work is complete, which will include reconstruction of the building’s long-vanished original staircase, the plan is to offer admission for guided tours at specific times, which will need to be booked in advance.
THE THREE SQUARES BAR CRAWL
Three squares tucked away in the middle of Gràcia (Fontana/Diagonal), within a few blocks’ walk of each other, contain many of the best neighbourhood cafés and bars. Any night out in Gràcia invariably entails passing through them at some point.
Traditionally, Plaça del Sol has been the beating heart of the district’s nightlife, though it was redesigned rather soullessly in the 1980s and is not quite so appealing during the day. Far more in keeping with Gràcia’s overall village-like tenor is the mouthful that is Plaça de la Revolució de Setembre de 1886, just east of Plaça del Sol, and especially Plaça Vila de Gràcia, to the south across Travessera de Gràcia. The 30m-high clocktower in the latter (known as Plaça Rius i Taulet until 2008) was a rallying point for nineteenth-century radicals. Their twenty-first-century counterparts prefer to meet for brunch at the popular café terrassas.
Park Güell
Set on the hillside above Gràcia, Antoni Gaudí’s extraordinary Park Güell was, with the exception of the Sagrada Família, his most ambitious project. Commissioned by Eusebi Güell (patron of Gaudí’s Palau Güell, off the Ramblas), it was originally planned as a private housing estate of sixty dwellings, furnished with ornamental paths, recreational areas and decorative monuments. The idea was to build a “Garden City” of the type then popular in England – that’s why the official name follows Gaudí in using the English spelling of “Park”. Gaudí worked on the project from 1900 until 1914, but in the end only two houses were actually built, and the park was opened to the public instead in 1922.
Park Güell ranks among Barcelona’s most popular tourist attractions, receiving millions of visitors each year. As a result, you now have to pay for access to the area that holds its most iconic sites, the Zona Monumental. A maximum of four hundred visitors is allowed in every half-hour, and each ticket is only valid for a specific half-hour time-slot (once inside, you can stay as long as you like). Tickets can be reserved online up to three months in advance. You can also buy them at ticket offices or ATMs in the park itself – in summer, check online to see whether they’re the day you plan to visit is already sold out – but you may have to wait for the next available time-slot.
Access to the rest of the park remains free. The wooded, landscaped gardens make a nice spot for a picnic, but other than to enjoy the sweeping views from the very highest point – the Turó de les Tres Creus, where three stone crosses atop a stepped tumulus mark the spot where Gaudí had planned to place a chapel – it’s unlikely to hold your interest for long. There’s a large outdoor café immediately above the Zona Monumental, but it’s usually filled with visitors killing time before they’re allowed to go in.

ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE: PARK GÜELL
As the park straddles a steep hill, all approaches involve an ascent on foot to reach the main entrance on C/Olot. Leaving the park, you’ll have to walk back down C/Larrard to Travessera de Dalt for bus or metro connections back to the city, though taxis do hang about the gates on C/Olot.

By bus Bus #24 from Pl. de Catalunya, Pg. de Gràcia or C/Gran de Grácia, drops passengers on Carretera del Carmel at the eastern side of the park. The Bus Turístic stops at the foot of C/Larrard.
By metro Marginally the closest station to the Zona Monumental is Lesseps in Gràcia; the 15min walk from there heads right along Travessera de Dalt and then left up steep C/Larrard. Alternatively, get off at Vallcarca and walk a few hundred metres down Avgda. de Vallcarca, to find mechanical escalators on your left that ascend Bxda. de la Glória to the park’s western entrance, from where footpaths lead back down to the Zona Monumental.
Zona Monumental
Daily: April, Sept & Oct 8am–8.30pm; May–Aug 8am–9.30pm; Nov–March 8.30am–6.30pm, last entry 1hr before closing • €8, €7 online; ages 7–12 €5.60/€4.90, under-7s free; guided tours €7 extra for all • 934 091 831, parkguell.cat
Spreading across the slopes, the core of Park Güell, sealed off as the Zona Monumental and looking down across the city to the Mediterranean, is an almost hallucinatory swirl of ideas and excesses. You can use your timed ticket to enter at any of three points, but it makes sense to approach it via the original main entrance, on C/Olot. The porter’s lodge to the right hosts an informative exhibit that places the park in the context of its times, but it’s so small that it usually entails a long wait in line to get in; the corresponding lodge to the left serves as a gift shop.
Straight ahead, a monumental stairway climbs past a giant mosaic salamander known as el drac (the dragon) to reach the vast Hall of Columns, where 84 Doric columns soar at disconcertingly irregular angles to enclose a space that Gaudí intended to be the estate’s market. Art critic Sacheverell Sitwell described it as “at once a fun fair, a petrified forest, and the great temple of Amun at Karnak, itself drunk, and reeling in an eccentric earthquake”.
Perhaps the best-known element of the park is the long, meandering ceramic bench that snakes along the edge of the terrace that forms the roof of the Hall of Columns. Entirely covered with a brightly coloured, broken tile-and-glass mosaic (a technique known as trencadís), it forms a dizzying sequence of abstract motifs, symbols, words and pictures.
Casa Museu Gaudí
Park Güell, outside Zona Monumental • Daily: April–Sept 9am–8pm; Oct–March 10am–6pm • €5.50, combined ticket with Sagrada Família audio-guide tour €24, under-10s free • 932 193 811, casamuseugaudi.org
One of Gaudí’s collaborators, Francesc Berenguer, designed and built a turreted house for the architect. Now known as the Casa Museu Gaudí, it stands within the park, immediately east of the Zona Monumental. Gaudí was persuaded to live here from 1906 until 1925, when he left to camp out at the Sagrada Família for good.
The downstairs rooms celebrate Gaudí’s work as a designer, via a diverting collection of furniture he created for other projects – a typical mixture of wild originality and brilliant engineering – while upstairs his ascetic study and bedroom have been kept much as he knew them. Religious texts and images offer some inkling of his personality, while various plans and artefacts explain more about the park.
Parc de la Creueta del Coll
Pg. de la Mare de Deu del Coll 77 • Daily 10am–dusk • Free • Bus #28 from Pl. de Catalunya, via Pg. de Gràcia, stops 100m from the park, or El Coll/La Teixonera
There could be no greater contrast with Park Güell than Horta’s Parc de la Creueta del Coll, a contemporary urban park laid out on the site of an old quarry by Olympic architects Martorell and Mackay. You’re greeted at the top of the park steps by an Ellsworth Kelly metal spike, while suspended by steel cables over a reflecting pool is a massive 50-tonne concrete claw, “In Praise of Water”, by Basque artist Eduardo Chillida. There’s a stand of palm trees by a small artificial lake, which becomes a summer swimming pool, and concrete promenades and picnic areas under the sheer quarry walls.
Combining the park with a visit to Park Güell is easy, too, though you’ll need a keen sense of direction to find it from the rear exit of Park Güell – it helps if you’ve climbed Güell’s three-crosses hill and fixed in mind the quarry walls, visible across the valley. It’s far easier to visit Parc de la Creueta del Coll first, then walk back down the main Passeig de la Mare de Deu del Coll until you see the signpost pointing down C/Balears (on your left) – from there, signposts guide you into Park Güell the back way.
Parc del Laberint
Pg. dels Castanyers 1–17 • Daily 10am–dusk • €2.50; free Wed & Sun • Mundet: use the Pg. Vall d’Hebron (Muntanya) exit, walk up the main road and against the traffic flow for 1min (past the sports pitches) and turn left into the grounds of the Velòdrom (cycle stadium)
Half a dozen metro stops beyond Gràcia, and confronted by the roaring traffic on the Passeig Vall d’Hebron, it seems inconceivable that there can be any kind of sanctuary to hand. Just a couple of minutes’ walk from Mundet metro, however, brings you to the gates of the Parc del Laberint, behind the cycle stadium. The former estate mansion is used by Barcelona’s parks and gardens department, while the late eighteenth-century gardens (the oldest in the city) make an enchanting spectacle. A series of shady paths, terraces, pavilions and water features embrace the hillside. The topiary maze at the heart of the park, El Laberint, was created for the Marquis de Llupià i Alfarràs in 1792 and designed as an Enlightenment puzzle concerning the forms of love. A statue of Eros serves as the reward for reaching the centre.
< Back to Gràcia, Park Güell and Horta

Les Corts, Pedralbes and 
Sarrià-Sant Gervasi
Northwest of Barcelona city centre, what was once the village of Les Corts is now seamlessly integrated into the modern city, and noteworthy primarily for holding the hallowed precincts of Camp Nou, FC Barcelona’s stupendous football stadium. Nearby, across Avinguda Diagonal, the Palau de Pedralbes is home to serene public gardens, while a half-day’s excursion can be made by walking from the palace, past the Pavellons Güell and Gaudí’s dragon gate, up to the calm cloisters of the Gothic monastery of Pedralbes. Complete the day by returning via Sarrià, to the east, with a pretty main street and market to explore. At night the focus shifts to the bars and restaurants of neighbouring Sant Gervasi, in the streets north of Plaça de Francesc Macià.

Uptown Avinguda Diagonal
María Cristina or tram T1, T2 or T3 from Pl. de Francesc Macià
The uptown section of Avinguda Diagonal runs through the heart of Barcelona’s flashiest business and shopping district. The giant L’Illa shopping centre flanks the avenue, its stepped design a prone echo of New York’s Rockefeller Center. Designer fashion stores are ubiquitous, particularly around Plaça de Francesc Macià and Avinguda de Pau Casals – at the top of the latter, Turó Parc (daily 8am–dusk) makes a good place to rest weary feet, with a small children’s playground and a café-kiosk. For picnic supplies, the traditional neighbourhood market, Mercat de Galvany (C/Santaló 65; Mon–Thurs & Sat 7am–2.30pm, Fri 7am–8pm; mercatgalvany.es), is just three blocks to the east.
Behind L’Illa, it’s worth seeking out Plaça de la Concordia, another surprising survivor from the past amid the uptown tower blocks. The pretty little square is dominated by its church belltower and ringed by local businesses (florist, pharmacy, hairdresser). Have a quiet drink at one of the outdoor cafés or head to Fragments Cafè for excellent bistro-style food.
Camp Nou and FC Barcelona
Avgda. Aristides Maillol • fcbarcelona.com • Collblanc/Palau Reial, then a 10min walk, or Bus Turístic stops outside the stadium
Football in Barcelona being a genuine obsession, support for the local giants FC (Futbol Club) Barcelona has been raised to an art form. Més que un club (“More than just a club”) is the proud boast, and certainly during the dictatorship years the club stood as a symbol around which Catalans could rally. Arch-rivals Real Madrid, on the other hand, were always seen as Franco’s club. In recent years, culminating in Barcelona’s fifth coronation as European champions in 2015, the swashbuckling players in the blaugrana (claret and blue) shirts have won hearts worldwide with their elegant tiki-taka, pass-and-move style, to become every football fan’s second-favourite team.
There’s no more invigorating introduction to Catalan passions than to take in a match at the magnificent Camp Nou (“New Ground”) stadium, sited in the Les Corts neighbourhood, behind the university buildings. Europe’s largest stadium was built in 1957, enlarged for the 1982 World Cup semifinal to accommodate 98,000 people, and is about to undergo a face-lift, scheduled for completion in 2021, that will increase its capacity to around 105,000. The club reckons on recouping €200 million, a third of the cost, from selling the naming rights to the new stadium.
Camp Nou provides one of the best football-watching experiences in the world. Attending a match here – tickets tend to be readily available for all but the very biggest clashes – serves as an invigorating introduction to Catalan passions. Whether you get to a game or not, the museum and stadium tour is a must, while the entire complex of what claims to be the “World’s Top Sports Club”, hosting FC Barcelona’s sixteen professional and amateur teams, also puts on basketball, handball and hockey games, and holds a public ice rink, souvenir store and café.
IT’S ONLY A GAME?
Some people believe football is a matter of life or death… I can assure you it is much, much more important than that. Bill Shankly
No Catalan football supporter would disagree with Liverpool legend and quip-meister Bill Shankly. These are fans who boo their own team if they think the performance isn’t up to scratch, thousands of white handkerchiefs waving along in disapproval. A disappointing season is seen as a slur on the Catalan nation, and if success goes instead to bitter rivals Real Madrid, then the pain is almost too much to bear. When team figurehead and captain Luís Figo was transferred to Madrid in 2000 (making him one of only a handful to have played for both clubs), the outrage was almost comical in its ferocity – at a later match between the two sides, a pig’s head was thrown onto the pitch as Figo prepared to take a corner. In recent years, though, there has been a lot more cheering than booing, as the team has played with a swagger rarely seen in modern club football.
Under their former coach Josep “Pep” Guardiola – one-time Barça player and all-Catalan hero – Barcelona evolved into a team of scintillating beauty, not only running rings around rivals from home and abroad, but also providing the bulk of the side that won the World Cup for Spain for the first time in 2010. The Barcelona style – don’t give the ball away, ever, period – is learned at La Masia, the club’s own training centre and school for young footballers, most of whom are Catalan or come at an early age from elsewhere. Half the current team are graduates, including the peerless, best-in-the-world, Lionel Messi. Things change quickly in football, but the production line at La Masia is the best guarantee that boos and white hankies will be absent from the Camp Nou for a while longer yet.
Museum and stadium tour
Entrance on Avgda. Aristides Maillol • Mid-Oct to March Mon–Sat 10am–6.30pm, Sun & hols 10am–2.30pm; April to mid-Oct daily 9.30am–7.30pm; last tour 1hr before closing; on match days, and also on the day before Champions League matches, the museum is open but there are no tours • €25, under-14s €20, under-6s free; audio-guide €5 • fcbarcelona.com • Palau Reial
Hundreds of fans daily make the pilgrimage to Camp Nou, where the combined visit to the club’s museum and the stadium itself – billed as the “Camp Nou Experience” – provides a magnificent celebration of Spain’s national sport. Tracing the history of the club from its foundation in 1899, the museum gradually shifts from black-and-white photos and battered old boots and balls to a relentless succession of silverware, including the six cups won in 2009 alone, Barcelona’s annus mirabilis; a cracking multimedia zone profiles historic games and famous players and relives the match-day atmosphere.
Beyond that, the self-guided tour winds through the visitors’ changing rooms and players’ tunnel out onto the pitch, and then leads up to the press gallery and directors’ box for stunning views. While it’s a poor substitute for attending an actual game, it does give the chance to take a selfie alongside a life-size photo of Lionel Messi. Eventually, you’re steered into the FC Botiga megastore, which sells everything from replica shirts (prices start at €100-plus) to branded bottles of wine.
Palau de Pedralbes
Avgda. Diagonal 686 • Gardens daily 10am–dusk • Free • Palau Reial or tram T1, T2 or T3
Opposite the university on Avinguda Diagonal, formal grounds stretch up to the Italianate Palau de Pedralbes – basically a large villa with pretensions. Owner Eusebi Güell donated it to the Spanish royal family in 1918, for use on their visits to Barcelona. The king stayed here for the first time in 1926, but within five years he had abdicated, and the palace somewhat lost its role. Franco kept it on as a presidential residence and it later passed to the city.
Although the palace is currently closed to the public, its gardens – a breezy oasis of Himalaya cedars, strawberry trees and bougainvillea – are worth a visit. Hidden in a bamboo thicket, to the left-centre of the facade – is the “Hercules fountain” (1884), an early work by Antoni Gaudí. He also designed the parabolic pergola to the right, which is covered in climbing plants and makes a nice place to sit and rest your feet. In June and July each year, the gardens hold a season of big-name concerts known as the Barcelona Music Festival (festivalpedralbes.com).
Pavellons Güell
Avgda. de Pedralbes 7 • Daily 10am–4pm, last entry 3.30pm; English tours, no extra charge, 10.15am, 11.15am & 3pm • €5, under-18s €2.50 • 933 177 652, rutadelmodernisme.com • Palau Reial, then a 5min walk
As an early test of his capabilities, Antoni Gaudí was asked by his patron, Eusebi Güell, to rework the entrance, gatehouse and stables of the Güell summer residence, which was sited on a large working estate well away from the filth and unruly mobs of downtown Barcelona. While the summer house itself was later given to the royal family, and rebuilt as the Palau de Pedralbes, the brick-and-tile stables and outbuildings – known as the Pavellons Güell – survive as Gaudí created them. They are frothy, whimsical affairs showing more than a Moorish touch to them, with minaret-like turrets that display Gaudí’s first experimentation with trencadís (broken tile mosaics), a technique he used ever afterwards on his subsequent, better-known projects.
However, it’s the gate that’s the most famous element. An extraordinary winged dragon made of twisted iron snarls at the passers-by, its razor-toothed jaws spread wide in a fearsome roar: backing up to pose for a photograph suddenly doesn’t seem like such a good idea. You can see the gate for free; paying the entry fee entitles you to peep into the dilapidated gatehouse; walk through Gaudí’s innovative, parabolic-arched stables, which now hold assorted tools and equipment used in the construction of La Pedrera; and admire the brickwork from the small gardens.
HERE BE DRAGONS
The slavering beast on Gaudí’s dragon gate at the Pavellons Güell is not the vanquished dragon of Sant Jordi (St George), the Catalan patron saint, but the one that appears in the Labours of Hercules myth, a familiar Catalan theme in the nineteenth century.
Gaudí’s design was based on the reworking of the myth by the Catalan renaissance poet Jacint Verdaguer, a friend of the Güell family, in his epic poem, ĽAtlàntida. Thus, the dragon that traditionally guarded golden apples in the Gardens of Hesperides here protects instead an orange tree (a more Catalan fruit). Gaudí’s gate indeed can be read as a homage to Verdaguer, with its stencilled roses representing those traditionally given to the winner of the Catalan poetry competition, the Jocs Floral, awarded to the poet in 1877.
Monestir de Pedralbes
Bxda. del Monestir 9 • April–Sept Tues–Fri 10am–5pm, Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10am–8pm; Oct–March Tues–Fri 10am–2pm, Sat & Sun 10am–5pm, hols 10am–2pm • €5, under-16s free, free Sun after 3pm, and all of first Sun of each month • 932 563 434, monestirpedralbes.bcn.cat • Palau Reial and 20min walk, or FGC Reina Elisenda (frequent trains from Pl. de Catalunya) and 10min walk, or bus #64 from Pl. Universitat
Founded in 1326 for the nuns of the Order of St Clare, the Gothic Monestir de Pedralbes is, in effect, an entire monastic village preserved on the outskirts of the city, within medieval walls that completely shut out the noise and clamour of the twenty-first century. It took craftsmen a little over a year to prepare Pedralbes (from the Latin petras albas, “white stones”) for its first community of nuns. The speed of that initial construction and the subsequent uninterrupted habitation by the order helps explain the perfect architectural harmony. After six hundred years of isolation, the monastery was sequestered by the Generalitat during the Civil War and it later opened to the public in 1983 – as part of the deal, a new convent was built alongside, in which the Clare nuns still reside.
The cloisters
The triple tiers of the magnificent cloisters of the Monestir de Pedralbes are supported by the slenderest of columns, with the only sound the tinkling water from the fountain. Side rooms and chambers give a clear impression of medieval convent life, from the chapter house and austere refectory to a fully equipped kitchen and infirmary.
The real highlight here, though, is a small chapel to the right of the entrance, the Capella de Sant Miquel, which is adorned with remarkably vivid frescoes painted in 1346 by Catalan artist Ferrer Bassa. High-tech displays in rooms nearby explain their symbolism and restoration, while a small room beside the chapel itself holds the carved marble tomb of the monastery’s original sponsor, Elisenda de Montcada, wife of Jaume II. Widowed in 1327, six months after she and her husband laid the first stone, Elisenda retired to an adjacent palace, where she lived until her death in 1364.
The nuns’ former dormitory, now equipped with a black marble floor and soaring oak-beamed ceiling, houses a selection of the rarer treasures. While the nuns themselves eschewed personal trappings, the monastery acquired valuable art and other possessions over the centuries – including pieces of Gothic furniture, paintings by Flemish artists, an impressive series of so-called “factitious” altarpieces from the sixteenth century (made up of sections of different style and provenance), and some outstanding illuminated choirbooks. The monastic church alongside, a simple, single-naved structure, retains some of its original fourteenth-century stained glass.
Sarrià
FGC Sarrià (take C/Mare de Deu de Núria exit), or bus #64 from Monestir de Pedralbes/Pl. Universitat
Once a small town in its own right, the Sarrià district still looks the part, with a narrow, traffic-free main street – C/Major de Sarrià – at the top of which stands the much-restored church of Sant Vicenç. The church flanks the main Passeig de la Reina Elisenda de Montcada, across which lies the neighbourhood market, Mercat Sarrià, housed in a 1911 modernista red-brick building.
You’ll find a few other surviving old-town squares down the main street, prettiest of which is Plaça Sant Vicenç de Sarrià (off C/Mañe i Flaquer), where there’s a statue of the saint. If you make it this way, don’t miss the Bar Tomás, just around the corner on C/Major de Sarrià, for the world’s best patatas bravas.
< Back to Les Corts, Pedralbes and Sarrià-Sant Gervasi

Tibidabo and Parc de 
Collserola
The views from the heights of Tibidabo (550m), the peak that signals the northwestern boundary of Barcelona, are legendary. On a clear day you can see across to the Pyrenees, and out to sea even as far as Mallorca. However, although many visitors make the tram and funicular ride up to Tibidabo’s wonderfully old-fashioned amusement park, few realize that the Parc de Collserola stretches beyond, peppered with peaks, wooded valleys and hiking paths, and among the city’s best-kept secrets. You can walk into the park from Tibidabo, but it’s actually better to start from its information centre, across to the west, above the hilltop village of Vallvidrera, which can be reached by another funicular ride. Meanwhile, families won’t want to miss the CosmoCaixa science museum, which can easily be seen en route to or from Tibidabo.
CosmoCaixa
C/Isaac Newton 26 • Tues–Sun 10am–8pm; also open Mon 10am–8pm during summer hols • €4; under-16s free, but children’s activities €4, planetarium €4 • 932 126 050, obrasocial.lacaixa.es • FGC Avgda. del Tibidabo (trains from Pl. de Catalunya) and 10min walk, or Tramvia Blau or Bus Turístic stop close by
For anyone travelling with children in tow, Barcelona’s enormous, up-to-the-minute science museum is an absolute must-see attraction, which takes at least two hours to explore fully. Originally housed in a converted modernista hospice, CosmoCaixa now also incorporates a light-filled public concourse and a huge underground extension, which is entered by means of a vast descending staircase that spirals around a desiccated Acariquara tree from the Amazon, and symbolizes a journey back to the origin of life on earth.
Hands-on experiments and displays on the lowest of the four subterranean levels range across life, the universe and everything, “from the quark to Shakespeare”. Most require a very large thinking cap, so younger children are soon going to be zooming around the open spaces. But there’s no denying the overall pull of the two main attractions, namely the hundred tonnes of “sliced” rock in the Mur Geològic (Geological Wall) and, best of all, the Bosc Inundat – nothing less than a thousand square metres of real Amazonian rainforest, complete with caimans, an anaconda safely ensconced in its own private enclosure, and giant catfish.
Pick up a schedule when you arrive of children’s and family activities, at their most frequent during weekends and school holidays. There are also daily 3D shows in the planetarium, plus a great gift shop and a café-restaurant with outdoor seating beneath the restored hospital facade.
Torre Bellesguard
C/Bellesguard 16 • Tues–Sun 10am–3pm, last entry 2.30pm; English-language tours Sat & Sun 11am • Self-guided tour €9, under-18s €7.20; guided tour €16/€12.80 • 932 504 093, bellesguardgaudi.com • FGC Avgda. del Tibidabo (trains from Pl. de Catalunya) and 15min walk, or Tramvia Blau and Bus Turístic stop close by
One of Gaudí’s least-known works, the Torre Bellesguard a few blocks west of CosmoCaixa, has opened its doors to visitors while still serving as a private residence. Built between 1900 and 1909, it’s a surprising hybrid of Gothic castle – in reference to the long-vanished castle of Catalunya’s King Martí the Humane, which occupied this high eminence in the fifteenth century – and modernista manor house, with additional Moorish influences into the bargain, including its smooth white interior spaces and abundant use of tiles.
To explore the place thoroughly, it’s best to coincide with a guided tour (there’s usually one English-language tour each day, at 11am; book ahead if possible), but even if you take the self-guided tour you’ll be briefly ushered inside. And be warned that the whole place may close to visitors when the owners choose to have a party or private event, so it’s always worth checking in advance before making the trek up here.
Parc d’Atraccions Tibidabo
Pl. del Tibidabo • Days and hours vary, but basically March–May & Oct–Dec Sat, Sun & hols only; June–Sept & hols Wed–Sun: park open noon–7/11pm depending on season; closed Jan & Feb • Skywalk ticket €12.70, full admission €28.50; €7.80/€10.30 for children under 1.2m tall • 932 117 942, tibidabo.es
Barcelona’s self-styled “magic mountain” amusement park, the Parc d’Atraccions, has been thrilling its citizens for over a century. It’s a mix of traditional rides, plus an influx of high-tech roller-coasters and free-fall drops, laid out around several levels of the mountaintop, and connected by landscaped paths and gardens. Some of the most famous historic attractions are grouped under the discounted “Skywalk” ticket, including the aeroplane – spinning since 1928 – the carousel, and the quirky Museu d’Autòmates, a fully functional collection of coin-operated antique fairground machines. Summer weekends finish with parades, concerts and a noisy correfoc, a theatrical fireworks display.
Sagrat Cor
Daily 10am–8pm • €2
The amazing views from everywhere in Tibidabo park become even more extensive if you climb the shining steps of the neighbouring Templo Expiatorio de España, otherwise known as the Sagrat Cor (Sacred Heart). Built from 1886 onwards – eleven years after its famous Paris equivalent, the Sacré Coeur – it’s topped by a huge statue of Christ. Inside the church, an elevator (ascensor) climbs to a sensational viewing platform at the very summit of the mountain, from where the city, surrounding hills and sea shimmer in the distance.
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE: PARC D’ATRACCIONS TIBIDABO
Getting to Tibidabo is a convoluted business, since you have to use several successive forms of transport, but it’s also half the fun of a day out. Expect the trip from the city centre to take up to an hour, all told.

By train, tram and funicular Take the FGC train (Tibidabo line #7) from Pl. de Catalunya station to Avgda. del Tibidabo (the last stop), where you cross the road to the tram/bus shelter. An antique tram, the Tramvia Blau (departures every 15–30min: mid-June to mid-Sept daily 10am–7.30pm; Nov–March Sat, Sun & hols 10am–6pm; April to mid-June & mid-Sept to Nov Sat, Sun & hols 10am–7.30pm; €5.50 single), then runs you up the hill to Pl. del Doctor Andreu; there’s a bus service instead out of season during the week. By the tram and bus stop on Pl. del Doctor Andreu (where there are several café-bars and restaurants), you change to the Funicular del Tibidabo, with connections to Tibidabo at the top (every 15min; operates when the Parc d’Attracions is open; €4.10 with park admission, €7.70 without).
By bus The Bus Turístic stops at Avgda. del Tibidabo, where you can change for the Tramvia Blau. Alternatively, the special Tibibus (T2A) runs direct to Tibidabo from Pl. de Catalunya (from 10.15am every day that the park is open; €3, fare reimbursed with park admission). Local bus #111 runs on a circuit (every 30min; city passes and transport tickets valid) between Tibidabo park and Vallvidrera village.
Torre de Collserola and Vallvidrera
Torre de Collserola: C/Vallvidrera al Tibidabo • Days and hours vary, but basically: March–June & Sept–Dec Sat & Sun noon–2pm & 3.15–6pm; June–Aug Wed–Sun noon–2pm & 3.30–8pm; closed Jan & Feb • €6, under-14s €4, under-3s free, combined ticket available with Parc d’Atraccions • 932 117 942, torredecollserola.com • Bus #111 from Tibidabo or Vallvidrera village
Follow the road from the Tibidabo car park and it’s only a few minutes’ walk to Norman Foster’s Torre de Collserola, a communications tower soaring high above the tree line, with a glass lift that whisks you up ten floors (115m) for yet more stunning views – 70km, they claim, on a good day.
Afterwards, you could just head back to Tibidabo for the funicular-and-tram ride back to the city, but to complete a circular tour it’s more interesting to follow the cobbled path near the tower’s car park which brings you out on the pine-clad edges of Vallvidrera, a well-to-do suburban village perched on the flank of the Collserola hills – a twenty-minute walk all told from Tibidabo. From here, another funicular station (every 6–10min; Mon–Fri 5am–midnight, Sat & Sun 5.36am–2am) connects to Peu del Funicular, an FGC station on the Sabadell and Terrassa line from Plaça de Catalunya.
Vallvidrera’s main square is far from obvious – turn left out of the funicular station and walk down the steep steps, and Plaça de Vallvidrera is the traffic roundabout at the bottom.

Parc de Collserola
Centre d’Informació daily 9.30am–3pm • 932 803 552, parcnaturalcollserola.cat • FGC Bxda. de Vallvidrera (on the Sabadell or Terrassa line from Pl. de Catalunya; 15min)
Given a half-decent day, bikers, hikers and outdoors enthusiasts alike make a beeline for the ring of wooded hills, known as the Parc de Collserola, beyond Tibidabo. The park information centre lies in oak- and pine-woods, an easy, signposted ten-minute walk up through the trees from the FGC Baixada de Vallvidrera train station. There’s a bar-restaurant here with an outdoor terrace, plus an exhibition on the park’s history, flora and fauna; the staff hand out English-language leaflets detailing walks that range from a twenty-minute stroll to the Vallvidrera dam to a couple of hours circling the hills.
Some walks – like the oak-forest hike – swiftly gain height for marvellous views over the tree canopy, while others descend through the valley bottoms to springs and shaded picnic areas. Perhaps the nicest short stroll from the information centre leads to the Font de la Budellera (1hr 15min return), a landscaped spring deep in the woods. Follow the signs from the font to the Torre de Collserola (another 20min), and you can return to Barcelona instead via the funicular from Vallvidrera, or even take in the views from the Collserola tower or Tibidabo before heading back.
< Back to Tibidabo and Parc de Collserola

Out of the city
Catalunya is remarkably diverse, stretching from the Mediterranean coast to the Pyrenees. Within a couple of days, you can see everything from historic villages and fragrant vineyards to medieval churches and seaside nightclubs. The region’s excellent public transport links and well-maintained roads mean that you have multiple options for getting around: hop on the train, which has routes that fan out across Catalunya, stopping at most major sights and towns, or board one of the many buses that wind up and down the coast. If you have more time, opt to rent a car to further discover the area, including Tarragona and beyond, or deep into the verdant inland. This chapter is geared towards day-trips; to find out about accommodation in the region, contact the local tourist offices, consult catalunya.com, or get hold of the separate Rough Guide to Spain.
Although there are plenty of traditional beach getaways close to Barcelona, like Castelldefels to the south or the small towns of the Costa Maresme to the north, unquestionably the best local seaside destination is Sitges, on the Costa Daurada half an hour south. This charming resort town has the perfect mix of culture, cocktails and coastline – and it has gained a glittering international reputation, particularly with gay visitors. The other essential excursion is to Montserrat, the extraordinary mountain and monastery 40km northwest of Barcelona, reached by a precipitous cable car or mountain railway ride. Besides being a site of great significance for Catalans, it’s also a terrific place for a hike in the hills.
If you enjoy Barcelona’s varied church architecture, there’s more to come, starting with Gaudí’s inspired work at the Colònia Güell, an idealistic community established by the architect’s patron Eusebi Güell. This is a half-day’s outing, while a second half-day can be spent visiting the Benedictine monastery at Sant Cugat del Vallès and the complex of early medieval churches at Terrassa, all largely unsung and utterly fascinating. Another route out of the city, due west, leads through the wine-producing towns of Sant Sadurní d’Anoia and Vilafranca del Penedès, both of which can be seen in a day’s excursion with enough time for a wine-tasting tour.
It’s also straightforward to see something of Barcelona’s neighbouring cities, all very different from the Catalan capital. South of Barcelona, beyond Sitges, Tarragona has a compact old town and an amazing series of Roman remains, while nearby Reus, the birthplace of Antoni Gaudí, features an interpretive museum that’s the last word on the man and his work. North of Tarragona unfolds inland Catalunya, peppered with small, wonderfully traditional towns, like Santa Coloma de Queralt. Up the coast sits medieval Girona, perhaps the most beautiful of all Catalan cities, with its river, fortified walls and golden buildings, while Figueres not far beyond boasts Catalunya’s most extraordinary museum, the amazing Museu Dalí.

REGIONAL FESTIVALS
FEBRUARY–MAY
Carnival February or March, dates vary. Sitges has Catalunya’s best Carnival celebrations.
International jazz festival Three weeks in March, Terrassa (jazzterrassa.org). Acts playing in clubs and old-town squares.
Fires i Festes de la Santa Creu First week in May, Figueres, with processions and music.
Trapezi Third week in May (trapezi.cat.en). International circus fair in Reus, with street performances and spectacle.
Festa de Corpus Christi (moveable feast, sometimes falls in early June). Big processions and streets decorated with flowers in Sitges.
JUNE–AUGUST
Dia de Sant Joan June 24. Celebrated everywhere; watch out for things shutting down for a day on either side.
Festa Major de Sant Cugat del Vallès Last week in June.
Festa Major de Sant Pere Last week in June, in Reus. The town’s biggest annual bash.
Gay Pride Sitges Second week in July, sometimes held in June (gaysitgespride.com). Several days of events, parties and street parades.
Festa de Sant Magi August 19 in Tarragona.
Festa Major Last week in August. Festival to honour Sitges’ patron saint, Sant Bartolomeu.
Festa Major in Vilafranca del Penedès August 29 & 30 (festamajorvilafranca.cat). Dedicated to Sant Felix, with human towers, dancing and processions.
SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER
Festa de la Fil·loxera September 8. Sant Sadurní d’Anoia’s big annual festival.
Festa de Santa Tecla September 23, in Tarragona, with processions of gegants and human castles.
The Setmana del Cava Second week of October. A sort of cava festival is held in Sant Sadurní d’Anoia.
Festival Internacional de Cinema Fantastic Early October (sitgesfilmfestival.com). Sitges hosts one of the premier horror and fantasy film fests in Europe, complete with film premieres and zombie walks.
Sitges
The lovely seaside town of Sitges, 36km south of Barcelona, is the highlight of the local coast. The great weekend escape for young Barcelonans, who have created a resort very much in their own image, it’s also a noted gay holiday destination, with an outrageous carnival and an ebullient nightlife to match – between June and September it seems like there’s a nonstop party going on. But Sitges is far more than just cocktails under the sun. It also has a beautifully preserved old town, along with a variety of well-curated art and history museums. Out of season, especially, Sitges is delightful: far less crowded, and with a temperate climate that encourages strolling along the promenade and exploring the narrow central lanes. Note that on Monday, many of the museums and restaurants are closed.

The old town
Old Sitges centres on a tangle of alleyways that climb up and over the knoll, topped by the landmark Baroque Església Parroquial (parish church) dedicated to Sant Bartolomeu, which divides the seafront in two. Sweeping views stretch beyond the beaches to either side and along the coast, while a cluster of late medieval whitewashed mansions holds assorted museums and galleries.
Scores of handsome, more recent townhouses were built in Sitges in the nineteenth century by successful local merchants (known as “Americanos”) who returned from Cuba and Puerto Rico. A walk along the seafront promenade reveals the best of them, adorned with wrought-iron balconies, stained-glass windows and ceramic decoration. The pedestrianized shopping street, Carrer Major, is the best place for browsing boutiques.
Museu Cau Ferrat
C/Fonollar • Tues–Sun: April–June & Oct 10am–7pm; July–Sept 10am–8pm; Nov–March 10am–5pm • €10, includes Museu Maricel • 938 940 364, museusdesitges.cat
The gorgeous renovated mansion that overlooks the sea and contains the Museu Cau Ferrat served from 1891 onwards as the home and workshop of artist and writer Santiago Rusiñol i Prats (1861–1931). Rusiñol organized five modernista festivals in Sitges between 1892 and 1899, and the town flourished as a major modernista centre under his patronage. Magnificently tiled rooms display an extraordinary array of paintings, artefacts and decorative ironwork gathered by Rusiñol, including works by Rusiñol himself and contemporaries such as Picasso, and even a couple of minor El Grecos that he bought when the painter’s reputation was much less elevated than it is today.
Museu Maricel
C/Davallada 12, adjoining Museu Cau Ferrat • Tues–Sun: April–June & Oct 10am–7pm; July–Sept 10am–8pm; Nov–March 10am–5pm • €10, includes Museum Cau Ferrat • 938 940 364, museusdesitges.cat
Browse the timeline of Catalan art from the tenth century on, including richly detailed medieval art and the 19th Luminist School of Sitges, a group of landscape artists who were inspired by the town’s beautiful seaside light and open skies.
Fundació Stämpfli
Pl. de l’Ajuntament 13 • March–June & Oct Fri 5–7pm, Sat–Sun 11am–2pm & 5–7pm; July–Sept Wed–Thurs & Fri 5–8pm, Sat–Sun 11am–2pm & 5–8pm; Nov–Feb Fri 4–7pm, Sat–Sun 11am–2pm • €5 • 938 940 364, fundacio-stampfli.org
Housed in Sitges’ former fish market and a similarly venerable adjoining building, the Fundació Stämpfli is home to the wide-ranging contemporary art collection of Swiss-born artist Peter Stämpfli and his wife, Anna Maria, who have been active members of the local art scene since the 1970s. The works – some eighty paintings, sculptures and more by international artists such as Erró, Gérard Fromanger and Stämpfli himself – offer a sweeping view of various art movements from the past fifty years. The renovated space in which the collection is presented is simple but beautiful, with a vaulted, wood-beamed ceiling and gleaming floors.
The beaches
The clean sand beaches, located to both east and west of the old-town headland, become extremely crowded in high season. For more space it’s best to keep walking west along the promenade, past a series of eight interlinked beaches that runs a couple of kilometres down the coast as far as the Hotel Terramar. There are breakwaters, beach bars, restaurants, showers and watersports facilities along the way, with the more notorious gay nudist beaches found at the far end.
CARNIVAL TIME
Carnival in Sitges (Carnestoltes in Catalan; Feb/March) is a spectacular affair, thanks largely to the strong gay presence. It opens on the so-called Fat Thursday with the arrival of the Carnival King, following which there’s a full programme of parades, masked balls, concerts, beach parties and sausage sizzles. The traditional xatónada gala dinners are named after the carnival dish, xató, a kind of salt-cod salad, which originates in Sitges. There’s a children’s procession on Sunday, while Carnival climaxes in Sunday night’s Debauchery Parade and the even bigger Tuesday-night Extermination Parade, featuring exquisitely dressed drag queens swanning about the streets in high heels. Bar doors stand wide open, bands play and processions and celebrations go on until dawn. Ash Wednesday itself sees the more traditional Burial of the Sardine.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: SITGES
By train Trains to Sitges leave Pg. de Gràcia or Barcelona Sants stations roughly every 30min (destination Vilanova or St Vicenç), and take 30–40min depending on the service. The last departure back to Barcelona is at around 10.30pm (starting again at around 5am).
By bus Mon-Bus (monbus.cat) runs a direct service to Sitges from Barcelona airport (Mon–Fri once or twice an hour 7.40am–11.40pm, Sat & Sun every 2–3hr), which takes around 35min and stops two blocks from the train station; the buses actually start from Ronda Universitat in Barcelona itself around 20min earlier. There are also hourly nightbuses year-round between Pg. de Vilafranca in Sitges and Pl. Catalunya and Pl. Espanya in Barcelona. For both day and night buses, you can by tickets on the bus (from €4 one-way).
Oficina de Turisme Pl. Eduard Maristany 2, next to the train station (Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 4–6.30pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 938 944 251, sitgestur.cat).
EATING
Sitges has a huge array of restaurants, and the quality is largely very good, thanks to a discerning, upmarket tourist crowd and well-heeled locals. Every restaurant along the front does a paella with a promenade view, though some of the more interesting places are hidden away in the backstreets. For picnic supplies visit the Mercat Municipal (Mon, Wed & Sat 8.30am–2pm, Tues, Thurs & Fri 8.30am–2pm & 5.30–8.30pm), close to the train station on Av. Artur Carbonell, which is good for cured meats, olives, cheese, fresh bread and fruit.

Alfresco C/Barrabeitg 4 938 940 600, alfrescorestaurante.es. Romantic old-town restaurant, tucked away off a stepped alley and boasting its own trellised patio. The menu matches its charm, with superb Catalan cuisine with Asian touches – Thai marinated lamb salad (€15) and grilled octopus with spinach (€18). Feb–April & Oct–Dec Thurs–Sat 8.30pm–midnight; May–Sept Tues–Sun 8.30pm–midnight.
El Cable C/Barcelona 1 938 948 761, elcable.cat. With its lively social scene, Sitges is a tapas town – and the long-running, amiable El Cable is one of the best. Feast on patatas bravas, ham croquettes and spicy sausage. Tapas €2–8. Daily noon–3.30pm & 7–11.30pm.
★La Nansa C/Carreta 35 938 941 927, restaurantlanansa.com. Family-run fish restaurant – nansa means fishing net – where set menus (from €20) may feature everything from fresh seafood to the local variation on the paella, arròs a la Sitgetana, complete with a healthy splash of Sitges’ Malvasia wine. Mon & Thurs–Sun 1.30–4pm & 8.30–11pm, Wed 8.30–11pm; closed Jan.
El Pou C/Sant Bonaventura 21 931 289 921, elpoudesitges.com. Stylish, welcoming tapas bar, where the Catalan-Japanese fusion menu includes duck carpaccio and meatballs with squid. Mains €10–28. Mon & Wed 7–11.30pm, Thurs–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8–11.30pm, Sun 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm.
La Salseta C/de Sant Pau 35 938 110 419, lasalseta.com. Classic, unpretentious Catalan dishes (cod with garlic confit, seafood paella, and plenty of vegetarian options), cooked with slow-food attention and using locally sourced ingredients, keep this cosy little dining room filled with tourists and locals alike. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm.
DRINKING AND NIGHTLIFE
The focus of local nightlife is c/Primer de Maig and c/Montroig, lined with café-terrassas that are busy in summer from morning to night. Call in at Parrot’s for the lowdown on the gay scene and to find out which clubs are in this year.

Parrot’s Pub Pl. de l’Industria 938 941 350, parrots-sitges.com. The stalwart of the gay bar scene in Sitges, with seats under lurid shaded parasols. The owners also run a Mediterranean hotel and restaurant next door. Daily 11am–2am.
Sky Bar Avgda. Sofia 12 938 113 500, hotelmimsitges.com. Toast the night at this soaring bar that crowns Hotel Mim Sitges. The star here is the spectacular view, but the cocktails also hold their own, including potent mojitos, as well as top-notch cava. Hours vary and are weather-dependent, but usually: Jan–May Sat–Sun noon–6pm; June–Dec Mon–Thurs & Sun 10am–2.30am, Fri–Sat 10am–3pm.
Vikingos C/Marqués de Montroig 7–9 938 949 687, losvikingos.com. Long-standing party-zone bar with an enormous a/c interior and streetside terrace. This and the similar Montroig next door serve drinks, snacks and meals from morning until night to a really mixed crowd. Mon–Wed 1pm–12.30am, Fri 1pm–1am, Sat 11am–1.30am, Sun 11am–12.30am.
Voramar C/Port Alegre 55 pub-voramar.com. Charismatic, old-school seafront bar, away from the main crowds, just right for an ice-cold beer or sundowner cocktail. Mon, Tues & Thurs–Sun 4.30pm–1am.
Montserrat
Otherworldly rock formations crown the mountain of Montserrat, which looms 40km northwest of Barcelona, off the road to Lleida. Hiking paths that lead to splendid views, tucked-away hermitage caves and, above all, a vast and historic monastery make Montserrat one of the most popular day-trips from the city. It’s easily reached in around one hour thirty minutes by train and then cable car or mountain railway for the final thrilling ride up. Once there, you can visit the basilica and monastery buildings, and complete your day with a walk around the woods and crags, using the two funicular railways that depart from the monastery complex. There are cafés and restaurants at the monastery, but they are relatively pricey, none too inspiring and very busy at peak times – there’s a lot to be said for taking your own picnic instead and striking off into the hills for an alfresco lunch.
Legends hang easily upon Montserrat. Fifty years after the birth of Christ, St Peter is said to have deposited an image of the Virgin (known as La Moreneta, the Black Virgin), carved by St Luke, in one of the mountain caves. The icon was lost in the early eighth century after being hidden during the Moorish invasion, but reappeared in 880, accompanied by the customary visions and celestial music. The chapel built to house it was in 976 superseded by a Benedictine monastery, set at an altitude of nearly 1000m. Miracles abounded and the Virgin of Montserrat soon became the chief cult image of Catalunya and a pilgrimage centre second in Spain only to Santiago de Compostela in Galicia, with the main pilgrimages to Montserrat taking place on April 27 and September 8. In addition to the tourists, tens of thousands of newly married couples come here to seek La Moreneta’s blessing, while Montserrat has also become an important nationalist symbol for Catalans.
The monastery
Basilica Daily 7.30am–8pm; access to La Moreneta 8–10.30am & noon–6.30pm; mid-July to Sept also 7.30–8pm • Boys’ choir Mon–Fri 1pm, Sun at noon & 6.45pm • Free
Of the religious buildings, only the Renaissance basilica, dating largely from 1560 to 1592, is open to the public. La Moreneta stands above the high altar – reached from behind, by way of an entrance to the right of the basilica’s main entrance. The approach to this beautiful icon reveals the enormous wealth of the monastery, as you queue along a corridor leading through the back of the basilica’s rich side-chapels. The monastery’s various outbuildings – including hotel and restaurant, post office, souvenir shop, self-service cafeteria and bar – fan out around an open square, and there are extraordinary mountain views from the terrace.
Museu de Montserrat
Museu de Montserrat April to mid-June & mid-Sept to Oct Mon–Fri 10am–5.45pm, Sat & Sun 10am–6.45pm; mid-June to mid-Sept daily 10am–6.45pm; Nov–March daily 10am–5.45pm • €7 • 938 777 745, museudemontserrat.com • Espai Audiovisual Mon–Fri 9am–5.45pm, Sat & Sun 9am–6.45pm • €6
The Museu de Montserrat, set in a modernist building by architect Josep Puig i Cadafalch, presents archeological finds brought back by travelling monks, together with paintings and sculpture dating from as early as the thirteenth century, including works by Old Masters, French Impressionists and Catalan modernistas. There’s also a collection of Byzantine icons, though other religious items are in short supply, as most of the monastery’s valuables were carried off by Napoleon’s troops who sacked the complex in 1811. For more on the history, and to learn something of the life of a Benedictine community, visit the stimulating Espai Audiovisual, near the information office.

Mountain walks
Funicular departures vary by season, but mostly every 20min, 10am–5pm • Santa Cova €5 return, Sant Joan €12.50 return, combination ticket €16 • cremallerademontserrat.cat
As you follow the mountain tracks that lead from the monastery to the nearby caves and hermitages, you can contemplate Goethe’s observation of 1816: “Nowhere but in his own Montserrat will a man find happiness and peace.” The going is pretty good on all the tracks and the signposting is clear, but you do need to remember that you’re on a mountain – take a bottle of water and keep away from the edges.
Two separate funiculars run from points close to the cable-car station; pick up a map with walking notes from the Montserrat tourist office. One drops to the path for Santa Cova, a seventeenth-century chapel built where the Moreneta icon is said to have been found. It’s an easy walk there and back, which takes less than an hour.
The other funicular rises steeply to the hermitage of Sant Joan, from where it’s a tougher 45-minute walk to the Sant Jeroni hermitage, and another fifteen minutes to the Sant Jeroni summit at 1236m. This is an excellent place to watch for peregrines, crag martins and black redstarts; in summer you may also spot alpine swifts, while Iberian wall lizards emerge from the crevices to bask on the rockfaces. Several other walks are also possible from the Sant Joan funicular, perhaps the nicest being the 45-minute circuit around the ridge that leads all the way back down to the monastery.
MONTSERRAT BOYS’ CHOIR
Montserrat is awash in spirituality – but never more so than when the world-famous boys’ choir sings. Time your visit to hear the boys’ soaring voices fill the basilica (Mon–Fri 1pm, Sun at noon & 6.45pm). The choir belongs to the Escolania (escolania.cat), a choral school established in the fourteenth century and unchanged in musical style since its foundation. One of the oldest boys’ choirs in Europe, the Escolania is comprised of boys aged nine to fourteen who receive a rigorous music-focused education at Monsterrat. Unlike its famous European counterparts, the choir has rarely toured abroad – that is, until now. After performing in the USA for the first time in 2014, the choir returned in 2017, making appearances on both coasts.
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE: MONTSERRAT
There are two ways to reach Montserrat by public transport – cable car and mountain railway – but in the first instance you need to take the FGC train (line R5, direction Manresa), which leaves Barcelona’s Pl. d’Espanya (Espanya) daily (hourly intervals 8.36am–4.36pm; extra departures March–Oct Mon–Fri 11.56am–4.56pm).

By cable car Get off the train at Montserrat Aeri (1hr) for the connecting cable car, the Aeri de Montserrat (every 15min: March–Oct daily 9.40am–7pm; Nov–Feb Mon–Fri 10.10am–5.45pm, Sat, Sun & hols 9.40am–6.15pm; €7 one-way, €10.30 return; 938 350 005, aeridemontserrat.com). Queues are possible at busy times. Returning to Barcelona, the R5 trains depart hourly from Montserrat Aeri (from 9.45am to around 7pm).
By mountain railway The Montserrat mountain railway, the Cremallera de Montserrat (hourly; daily 8.48am–5.48pm; April–June & Oct Sat & Sun until 7.48pm; July–Sept daily until 7.48pm; €6.55 one-way, €10.90 return; 902 312 020, cremallerademontserrat.cat), departs from Monistrol de Montserrat (the next stop after Montserrat Aeri, another 4min), and takes 20min. Returning to Barcelona, the R5 trains depart hourly from Monistrol de Montserrat (from 8.15am).
Tickets An information desk at Pl. d’Espanya station and the FGC shop at El Triangle detail all the fare options, including return through-tickets from Barcelona (around €20) for either train/cable car or train/mountain railway. Two combination tickets are available, and can also be bought at the Pl. de Catalunya tourist office in Barcelona: the Trans Montserrat (€31.80), which includes all transport services, including unlimited use of the mountain funiculars; and the Tot Montserrat (€49.95), which includes the same plus monastery museum and audiovisual exhibit entry and a self-service lunch of Catalan dishes.
By car Take the A2 motorway as far as the Montserrat exit, and then follow the BP-1103 to the Montserrat turn-off – or park at either the cable-car or the mountain-railway station and take the rides up instead. All-in cable car/Cremallera/Montserrat attraction combo tickets are available at the station for drivers who park and ride.
INFORMATION
Visitor centre At the monastery (Mon–Fri 9am–5.45pm, Sat & Sun 9am–6.45pm; 938 777 701, montserratvisita.com). You can pick up maps of the complex and mountain, and they can also advise about accommodation, from camping to staying at the three-star Abat Cisneros hotel.
Sant Cugat and Terrassa
A series of remarkable churches lies on the commuter train line northwest of Barcelona, the first in the town of Sant Cugat del Vallès – just 25 minutes from the city – and the second (actually a group of three) another fifteen minutes beyond in the industrial city of Terrassa. You can easily see all the churches in a morning, but throw in lunch and this just about stretches to a day-trip, and it’s not a bad ride in any case – after Sarrià, the train emerges from the city tunnels and chugs down the wooded valley into Sant Cugat.
Sant Cugat del Vallès
Reial Monestir Mon–Sat 8am–noon & 4–9pm, Sun open for Mass from 9am • Free Museu del Monestir May–Sept Tues–Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 5–8pm, Sun & hols 10.30am–2.30pm; Oct–April Tues–Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 10.30am–2.30pm • Free Museu del Tapís Contemporani May–Sept Tues–Fri 5–8pm, Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 5–8pm, Sun & hols 10.30am–2.30pm; Oct–April Tues–Fri 4–7pm, Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 10.30am–2.30pm • Free • 936 759 951, www.museu.santcugat.cat
The Benedictine Reial Monestir (Royal Monastery) at Sant Cugat del Vallès was founded as far back as the ninth century, though most of the surviving buildings date from three or four hundred years later. Its fawn stone facade and triple-decker bell tower make a lovely sight as you approach from the square outside, through the gate, past the renovated Bishop’s Palace and under a splendid rose window. Finest of all, though, is the beautiful twelfth-century Romanesque cloister, with noteworthy capital carvings of mythical beasts and biblical scenes. Their unusual homogeneity owes to the fact that all were completed by a single sculptor, Arnau Gatell.
The monastery complex encompasses the Museu de Sant Cugat, which includes the restored dormitory, kitchen and refectory of the monastery, and holds exhibitions about its history and monastic life. What were once the monastery’s kitchen gardens lie across from the Bishop’s Palace, though the formerly lush plots that sustained the brothers are now mere dusty gardens, albeit with views over the low walls to Tibidabo and the Collserola hills. The Museu del Tapís Contemporani (Contemporary Tapestry Museum) also forms part of the museum grounds. Set in the 1926 Casa Aymat, once the workshop and factory of textile artist Tomàs Aymat, the museum explores the formidable textile history of Catalunya.

FROM TOP AQÜEDUCTE DE LES FERRERES, TARRAGONA; GIRONA; SITGES BEACH

ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: SANT CUGAT DEL VALLÈS
By train FGC trains on the S1 line connect Pl. de Catalunya in Barcelona with Sant Cugat, which is in Zone 2, every 10–15min (fgc.cat). Once in Sant Cugat, walk straight ahead out of the train station and down the pedestrianized C/Valldoreix, taking the first right and then the first left (it’s still C/Valldoreix), and then keep straight along the shopping street (C/Santa María and then C/Santiago Rusiñol) until you see the monastery bell tower (10min walk).
Oficina de Turisme Sant Cugat del Vallès, Pl. Octavia 10, inside the main doorway of the monastery (June–Sept Tues–Fri 10.30am–1.30pm & 5.30–7pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; Oct–May Tues–Fri 10.30am–1.15pm & 4.15–5.45pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 4–6pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; 936 759 952, turisme.santcugat.cat).
Terrassa
Terrassa, a large city with a population of 200,000 located 25km northwest of Barcelona, was an important textile producer in the nineteenth century, and retains many fine modernista-style factories, mills and warehouses that now enjoy protected status. But Terrassa has a much longer history, and its true treasures stand on the edge of the city centre, built on the site of the Roman town of Ègara – three pre-Romanesque churches, dating from the fifth to the tenth centuries.
La Seu d’Ègara
La Seu d’Ègara, Pl. del Rector Horns 1 • Tues–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 11am–2pm • €7, under-6s free • 937 833 702, seudegara.cat
Known as La Seu d’Ègara, Terrassa’s fully restored ecclesiastical complex centres on its largest church, Sant Pere, which sports a badly faded Gothic mural and a tenth-century mosaic fragment within its walls. The church of Santa María is far better endowed, featuring a mosaic pavement outside and sunken baptismal font inside, both of which date from the fifth century. Much later Gothic (fourteenth- and fifteenth-century) murals and altarpieces – one by Catalan master Jaume Huguet – are also on display. But it’s the fifth-century baptistry of Sant Miquel that’s the most fascinating – a tiny, square building of rough masonry, steeped in gloom, with eight assorted columns supporting the dome, each with a carved Roman or Visigothic capital. Underneath sits the partially reconstructed baptismal bath, while steps lead down into a simple crypt.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: TERRASSA
By train FGC trains from Barcelona (S1 line from Pl. de Catalunya; fgc.cat) depart every 20–30min – get off at Terrassa-Rambla, the last stop, which is in Zone 3. The churches are a 20min walk from the station – turn right from the Rambla d’Ègara exit, then immediately right again into Pl. de Clavé, follow C/Major up to Pl. Vella, cross the square, turn up C/Gavatxons and follow C/Sant Pere, C/Nou de Sant Pere and C/Creu Gran, finally crossing a viaduct to arrive at the entrance. There is a more convenient Renfe mainline train station in Terrassa (direct trains from Barcelona Sants every 20min; renfe.com) – a straight 10min walk down C/Mas Adel to the churches – but only the FGC line connects both Sant Cugat and Terrassa.
Oficina de Turisme Masia Freixa, Plaça Freixa i Argemí 11 (Tues–Fri 9am–2pm & 5–7pm, Sat–Sun 10am–2pm; Aug open mornings only; 937 397 019, visitaterrassa.cat). Organizes guided tours throughout the city, including many of its historic buildings.
Colònia Güell
Before work at Barcelona’s Park Güell got under way, Antoni Gaudí had already been charged with the design of parts of Eusebi Güell’s earliest attempts to establish a Utopian industrial estate, or colònia (colony), on the western outskirts of the city. The Colònia Güell (gaudicoloniaguell.org) at Santa Coloma de Cervelló was very much of its time – more than seventy similar colonies were established along Catalan rivers in the late nineteenth century, using water power to drive the textile mills. The concept was also familiar in Britain, where enlightened Victorian entrepreneurs had long created idealistic towns (Saltaire, Bournville) to house their workers.
The Colònia Güell was begun in 1890, and by 1920 incorporated over one hundred houses and public buildings, plus the chapel and crypt for which Gaudí was responsible. The Güell company was taken over in 1945 and the whole complex closed as a going concern in 1973, though the buildings have since been restored – and, indeed, many are still lived in today. There are rows of terraced houses, with front gardens tended lovingly by the current inhabitants, while brick towers, ceramic panels and stained glass elevate many of the houses above the ordinary. It’s a working village, so you’ll also find a bank and pharmacy, as well as two or three cafés and restaurants, and on Saturdays there is a farmers’ market, with fresh fruit and vegetables from the Baix Llobregat area.
Gaudí’s church
May–Oct Mon–Fri 10am–7pm, Sat & Sun 10am–3pm; Nov–April Mon–Fri 10am–5pm, Sat & Sun 10am–3pm; generallly closed for visits during Mass on Sun (11am & 1pm) • €7 • gaudicoloniaguell.org
Gaudí’s church – built into the pine-clad hillside above the colony – is a masterpiece. While you can see the angular exterior from the outside for free, to see the far more dramatic interior you’ll first have to buy a ticket at the visitor centre. The crypt was designed to carry the weight of the chapel above, its palm-tree-like columns supporting a brick vault, and the whole lot resembling a labyrinth of caves fashioned from a variety of different stone and brick. Several of Gaudí’s more extraordinary flights of fancy – like the original scalloped pews, the conch shells used as water stoups, the vivid stained glass and the window that opens up like the wings of a butterfly – presage his later work on the Sagrada Família. Despite appearances, the church was never actually finished, and Gaudí stopped work on it in 1914. Ongoing restoration aims to complete the outer walls, though Gaudí’s planned 40m-high central dome is unlikely ever to be realized.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: COLÒNIA GÜELL
By train Take the FGC train S4, S8 or S33 (direction Martorell; departures every 15–20min; fgc.cat) from Pl. d’Espanya to the small Colònia Güell station; the ride takes 20min. From the station, follow the painted blue footprints across the highway and into the colònia; they lead directly to the visitor centre (10min).
Centre d’Acollida de Visitants (May–Oct Mon–Fri 10am–7pm, Sat & Sun 10am–3pm; Nov–April Mon–Fri 10am–5pm, Sat & Sun 10am–3pm; 936 305 807, gaudicoloniaguell.org). The visitor centre has an exhibition (with English notes).
Guided tours Tours of the church, or of both the church and the rest of Colònia Güell, are available daily throughout the year; admission with one tour €9.50, with both €11.50. An audio-guide (€9, including admission) is also offered.
EATING AND DRINKING
Ateneu Unió Pl. Joan Güell 5 936 613 111. The big, old-fashioned, if a bit faded, bar-restaurant on the quiet central square is good for sandwiches, tapas and a decent menú del dia (from €12) served on the sunny terrassa. Daily 6am–11pm.
L’Alt Penedès wine region
L’Alt Penedès wine region (enoturismepenedes.cat), roughly halfway between Barcelona and Tarragona, is the largest Catalan producer of still and sparkling wines – as becomes increasingly clear the further the train heads into the region, with vines as far as the eye can see on both sides of the track. Both the two main towns to visit can easily be seen in a single day: Sant Sadurní d’Anoia, closer to Barcelona, is the self-styled “Capital del Cava”, home to fifty-plus producers of sparkling wine, while Vilafranca del Penedès, ten minutes down the line, is the region’s administrative capital and produces mostly still wine, red and white.
If you’re serious about visiting vineyards, the trip is better done by car, as many of the more interesting boutique producers lie out in the countryside. Either of the towns’ tourist offices can provide a good map pinpointing all the local vineyards as well as the rural farmhouse restaurants. However, even by train you’ll be able to visit a winery or two, including one of the most famous of Catalan wine names.
Sant Sadurní d’Anoia
The small town of Sant Sadurní d’Anoia (population 12,000), built on land watered by the Riu Noya, has been an important centre of wine production since the eighteenth century. When, at the end of the nineteenth century, French vineyards suffered heavily from phylloxera, Sant Sadurní prospered, though later it too succumbed to the same wasting disease – something remembered still in the annual September festival by the parade of a representation of the feared phylloxera parasite. The production of cava, for which the town is now famous, began only in the 1870s – an industry that went hand in hand with the Catalan cork business, established in the forests of the hinterland. Today, a hundred million bottles a year of cava are turned out by dozens of companies, many of which are only too happy to escort you around their premises, show you the fermentation process and let you taste a glass or two.
CAVA
Cava is a naturally sparkling wine made using the méthode champenoise, the traditional method for making champagne. The basic grape varieties of L’Alt Penedès are macabeu, xarel.lo and parellada, which are fermented to produce a wine base and then mixed with sugar and yeast before being bottled: a process known as tiratge. The bottles are then sealed hermetically – the tapat – and laid flat in cellars – the criança – for up to nine months to ferment for a second time. The wine is later decanted to get rid of the sediment before being corked.
The cava is then classified according to the amount of sugar used in the fermentation: either Brut (less than 20g a litre), Sec (20–30g), Semisec (30–50g) or Dolç (more than 50g). This is the first thing to take note of before buying or drinking: Brut and Sec are to most people’s tastes and are excellent with almost any food, or as an aperitif; Semisec and Dolç are better consumed as dessert wines.
Freixenet
Daily tours and tastings, lasting 1hr 30min; usually Mon–Sat 9.30am–4.30pm, Sun 10am–1pm; check website for variations; reservations suggested • €12, under-18s €8.50, under-8s free • 938 917 000, freixenet.es
Most people never get any further than the most prominent and most famous company, Freixenet – producer of those distinctive black bottles – whose building is right outside the train station. Many other companies have similar arrangements, including the out-of-town Codorníu – the region’s earliest cava producer – which has a fine building by modernista architect Josep Puig i Cadafalch as an added attraction.
Codorniu
Daily tours; check website to confirm times; English tours generally 3 times daily during the week, and 2 times daily at weekends; reservations suggested • €12 (€19 Anna tour, €22 Puig i Cadafalch tour), under-18s €8 (€14 Anna tour, €18 Puig i Cadafalch tour), under-7s free • 938 913 342, codorniu.com
Codorniu offers an array of tours, including the traditional tour, the new Anna tour, which focuses on light and fresh Anna de Codorniu tastings; and a Puig i Cadafalch tour, which includes an in-depth exploration of the art and architecture of the winery. There are several dozen other caves or cellars in and around town, all shown on a map available at the Sant Sadurní tourist office.
Jean Leon
In Torrelavit, 7km west of Sant Sadurní d’Anoia • Mon–Fri 9am–6pm, Sat, Sun & hols 9am–2pm • Tours from €15, reservations required • 938 995 512, jeanleon.com
This boutique winery is as colourful as its founder – Jean Leon. Born Ceferino Carrión in Santander, Jean Leon ambitiously struck out for New York and then Hollywood, where, with James Dean, he opened the famous La Scala restaurant in Beverly Hills. But Leon’s love of Spain – and wine – brought him back to the Penedès region, where he launched the eponymous winery in the early 1960s. Today, it’s owned and managed by Torres, and features an American-modernist-inspired visitor centre set in particularly bucolic surroundings. Lively themed tours include tastings of Jean Leon’s signature single-vineyard wines, many named after key phases in Leon’s life, as well as superb local cuisine.
Vilafranca del Penedès
As a town, Vilafranca del Penedès is rather more interesting than Sant Sadurní. Founded in the eleventh century in a bid to attract settlers to land retaken from the expelled Moors, it became a prosperous market centre. That character remains evident today, in a compact old town at whose heart lie narrow streets and arcaded squares adorned with restored medieval mansions.
From the train station, walk up to the main Rambla de Nostra Senyora and cut to the right up C/Sant Joan to the enclosed Plaça de Sant Joan, which has a small daily produce market. A rather larger affair takes place every Saturday, when the stalls also stock clothes, household goods, handicrafts and agricultural gear. The Festa Major, meanwhile, at the end of August and the first couple of days in September, brings the place to a standstill: dances and parades clog the streets, while the festival is renowned for its display of castellers – teams of people competing to build human towers.
Vinseum
Pl. Jaume I 5 • May–Sept Tues–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; Oct–April Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm • €7 • 938 900 582, vinseum.cat
Vilafranca’s town museum, the Vinseum, is housed in a medieval mansion in the centre, and is the best place to get to grips with the region’s wine industry. Exhibitions range far and wide, with the emphasis as much on local traditions and culture as wine. Visits culminate with a tasting in the museum’s own tavern, which is open daily until 11pm on weekdays and until midnight at the weekend.
Torres
3km northwest of Vilafranca • Mon–Sat 9.15am–4.45pm, Sun & hols 9.15am–1pm • Tours of varying lengths, some with food as well, from €9 • 938 177 487, clubtorres.com
The vineyards of Vilafranca are all out of town, though the largest and best-known winery, Torres, is only a short taxi ride away, on the Sant Martí de Sarroca road. Launched in 1870 by Jaime Torres, this family-run behemoth is one of Spain’s most recognizable wine brands – and offers a superb array of tours, including a stroll through the Mas Plana vineyards. Also owned by Torres is Jean Leon at Torrelavit, closer to Sant Sadurní.
Parés Baltà
Masia Can Baltà, Pacs del Penedès, just west of Vilafranca • Daily tours 9.30am–6.30pm; reservations necessary • from €10 • 938 901 399, paresbalta.com
This is one of the smaller family-run wineries in L’Alt Penedès, which offer a unique alternative to the biggies. Parés Baltà, helmed by two women winemakers, focuses on organic wines, and offers a variety of tours around its lovely property. In some parts, the vineyards grow amid wild parkland – Parés Baltà is one of the few producers in Spain with vineyards in a natural park, the Parc del Foix. Pick up a bottle of the award-winning rosé Parés Baltà Ros de Pacs.
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE: L’ALT PENEDÈS
By train Renfe services from Pl. de Catalunya or Barcelona Sants (Mon–Fri every 30min, Sat & Sun every 1hr, renfe.com) run west into L’Alt Penedès, calling at Sant Sadurní d’Anoia (40min) and Vilafranca del Penedès (50min).
INFORMATION AND TOURS
L’ALT PENEDÈS
Spanish Trails Adventures (935 001 616, spanish-trails.com) offers full-day, small-group escorted Penedès wine tours (from €105, transport and lunch included), including a cycling and wine tour option that lets you bike the quiet country lanes while visiting two or three wineries.
Catalunya Bus Turístic (catalunyabusturistic.com) stops off at Jean Leon, Miguel Torres and Freixenet for tastings and tours during a half-day circuit (leaves Barcelona Thurs & Sun 8.30am; €69).
SANT SADURNÍ D’ANOIA
Oficina de Turisme C/Hospital 26 (Tues–Sun 10am–2pm; 938 913 188, turismesantsadurni.com). The office is in the centre of town – a 15min walk from the train station – at the CIC Fassina Cava Welcome Center, which offers visitors an introduction to the bubbly stuff (€6 entry; see website for tour schedule).
VILAFRANCA DEL PENEDÈS
Oficina de Turisme C/Hermenegild Clascar 2 (Mon 3–6pm, Tues–Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 3–6pm, Sun & hols 10am–1pm; 938 181 254, turismevilafranca.com).
EATING AND DRINKING
VILAFRANCA DEL PENEDÈS
La Fàbrica C/Hermenegild Clascar 4 938 171 538, restaurantlafabrica.com. This Japanese-Mediterranean fusion spot inside an old pasta factory has an excellent lunchtime menu (€12), as well as à la carte offerings that range from (quite fittingly) home-made pastas to tempura and sushi (mains €8–17). Mon–Sat 1.15–3.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm.
Inzolia C/Palma 21, off C/Sant Joan 938 181 938, inzolia.com. The most agreeable place in town to sample the local wines – a range of cavas and wines is sold by the glass, and there’s a good wine shop attached. Mon–Sat 10am–3pm & 5–10pm.
Tarragona
Majestically sited on a rocky hill, perched directly above the sea 100km southwest of Barcelona, TARRAGONA is an ancient place: settled originally by Iberians and then Carthaginians, it was later used as the base for the Roman conquest of the peninsula, which began in 218 BC with Scipio’s march south against Hannibal. The fortified city became an imperial resort and, under the Emperor Augustus, who lived here for two years, “Tarraco” was the most elegant and cultured city of Roman Spain, boasting at its peak a quarter of a million inhabitants.
Tarragona today is still a very handsome city – especially the upper town, with the sweeping Rambla Nova at its heart, lined with cafés and restaurants. The parallel Rambla Vella marks the start of the old town, while to either side of the ramblas is scattered a profusion of relics and monuments from Tarragona’s Roman past. The city also holds a wide range of museums, dedicated among other things to modern art, the port and harbour, and the noble Castellarnau family – the city highlight is the archeology museum. Note that most of the sights are closed on Mondays, though the Catedral, old town and the exterior of certain Roman remains can still be seen.

Catedral
Pl. de la Seu • Mid-March to mid-June & mid-Sept to Oct Mon–Sat 10am–7pm; mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 10am–8pm; Nov to mid-March Mon–Fri 10am–5pm, Sat 10am–7pm • €5, under-16s €3, under-7s free, includes entry to Museu Diocesà • 977 247 069, catedraldetarragona.com
The focal point of the medieval old town, the Catedral is a site of great antiquity; the Christian church was built over the provincial Roman forum. Sitting at the top of a broad flight of steps, the main facade presents a soaring Gothic portal framed by Romanesque doors, surmounted by a cross and an elaborate rose window. Other than during services, entrance to the cathedral is through the lovely cloisters (claustre; signposted up a street to the left of the facade), where among several oddly sculpted capitals is one representing a cat’s funeral being directed by rats. The ticket also gives access to the Museu Diocesà, piled high with ecclesiastical treasures, including impressive altarpieces and detailed goldwork.
Museu Nacional Arqueològic
Pl. del Rei 5 • June–Sept Tues–Sat 9.30am–8.30pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–May Tues–Sat 9.30am–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4.50 • 977 236 209, mnat.cat
The huge collection of the modern Museu Nacional Arqueològic, on the seaward edge of the old town, is largely devoted to the Roman era, and serves as a marvellous reflection of the richness of imperial Tarraco. Thematic displays cover the various remains and buildings around the city, as well as whole rooms devoted to statues, inscriptions, ceramics, jewellery, mosaics – including a colourful floor mosaic depicting dozens of species of fish – and some remarkable glass vessels.
Museum tickets also include admission to Tarraco’s ancient necropolis – a twenty-minute walk from the centre, down Avinguda Ramon i Cajal, off Rambla Nova – where both pagan and Christian tombs have been uncovered.
Roman Tarragona: Museu d’Història de Tarragona
April–Sept Tues–Sat 9am–9pm, Sun & hols 9am–3pm; Oct–March Tues–Sat 9am–7pm, Sun & hols 9am–3pm • Each site €3.30, joint ticket to all €11.05, under-16s free • 977 242 220, tarragona.cat
Most of Tarragona’s Roman sites are grouped under the umbrella of the Museu d’Història de Tarragona (Tarragona History Museum), and share the same opening hours. These start most spectacularly with the Pretori i Circ Romans (entered from Pl. del Rei), built at the end of the first century AD to hold chariot races. The vaults and chambers have been restored to spectacular effect, while a lift takes you up to the roof of the Pretorium Tower – which chillingly still served as a prison in the post-Civil War years – for the best view in Tarragona, looking down over the nearby Amfiteatre. There may only be scant remains of the ceremonial provincial forum (Pl. del Fòrum), but the Fòrum Local (C/Lleida, a short walk west of Rambla Nova, near the central market) is far more impressive, where the evocative remains of a temple, shops, Roman road and house foundations can still be seen.
Aqüeducte de les Ferreres
Off N240, Lleida road • Open access • Free • Take the bus marked “Sant Salvador” (every 30min; 10min) from the stop outside Av. Prat de la Riba 11 (western end of Rambla Nova and off Av. Ramon i Cajal)
Arguably Tarragona’s most remarkable monument, the Roman aqueduct that brought water to the city from the Riu Gayo, some 32km distant, stands 4km outside the original city walls. Its most impressive surviving section, nearly 220m long and 26m high, lies in an overgrown valley, off the main road, in the middle of nowhere, and is popularly known as the Pont del Diable (“Devil’s Bridge”).
Local beaches
The rocky coastline below Tarragona conceals a couple of reasonable beaches. The closest to town is the long Platja del Miracle, over the rail lines below the amphitheatre, but Platja Arrabassada, a couple of kilometres further up the coast, is nicer by far, and holds a smattering of beach bars. Reach it on a pleasant thirty-minute walk by taking Via Augusta off the end of Rambla Vella.
CULINARY DAY-TRIP TO THE CAMPS SISTERS
Catalunya is justly famous for its wildly progressive cuisine, but this culinary stardom was born in the region’s traditional dishes, many of which reveal Catalunya’s natural bounty. For a taste, turn to les germanes Camps (the Camps sisters) at Hostal Colomí (C/Raval de Jesús 12, 977 880 653; Tues–Sun 1–4pm) in the lovely historical town of Santa Coloma de Queralt, about 50km northwest of Tarragona. For many, Hostal Colomí, which was founded in 1948, isn’t just the best traditional Catalan cuisine in the Tarragona region. It’s the best in the country. The meal starts with two large porrons (pitchers) of wine – one white, one red – and a platter of pa amb tomàquet (bread smeared in tomato and drizzled in olive oil). The feast continues, including warm ham croquettes, cod and platters of grilled meat and asparagus from the open-air grill, culminating in dessert – crema Catalana, of course. Best of all: the set lunch menu is an excellent deal, at €15.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: TARRAGONA
By train Hourly AVE (high-speed) trains from Barcelona Sants take just 35min, but tickets are expensive and the Camp de Tarragona AVE station is a 10min drive from the centre of town, which adds on the price of a taxi. Otherwise, normal trains from Estació França, Pg. de Gràcia and Barcelona Sants (every 30min; renfe.com) take just over an hour: turn right out of the station, and climb the steps ahead of you to reach Rambla Nova, by the statue of Roger de Llúria (10min).
Oficina de Turisme C/Major 39 (July–Sept Mon–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; Oct–June Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 3–5pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 3–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; 977 250 795, tarragonaturisme.cat).
EATING
The pretty old-town squares, like Pl. del Rei, Pl. del Fòrum and Pl. de la Font, are the best places for outdoor drinks and meals. The last in particular features more than a dozen cafés, bars and restaurants serving everything from pintxos to pizzas. Otherwise, for a tasty paella lunch it’s worth heading down to Tarragona’s so-called fishermen’s quarter, Serrallo, a 15min walk west along the industrial harbourfront from the train station.

AQ Restaurant C/Coques 7 977 215 954, aq-restaurant.com. This handsome restaurant – done up in gleaming blonde wood and sleek furnishings – has impressive cuisine to match (main dishes €18–25). Husband-and-wife team Quintín and Ana (after whom the restaurant is named) serve up seasonal food with flair, including superb fresh fish and shellfish and grilled meats. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–11pm.
Els Arcs Misser Sitges 13 977 218 040, restaurantarcs.com. Ancient, graceful stone arches preside over a cosy dining room. Fresh Mediterranean dishes include a salad of citrus-marinated quail and octopus risotto with artichokes. Expect to pay around €40/person, without drinks. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
El Llagut C/Natzaret 10, at Pl. del Rei 977 228 938. A top town-centre spot for seafood and rice dishes, with a quiet terrassa opposite the archeological museum, and a welcoming staff. There’s a great set-lunch deal from €13; otherwise à la carte meals cost around €22–27. July & Aug daily 1–4pm & 8.30pm–midnight; Sept–June Mon 1–4pm, Tues–Sat 1–4pm & 8.30pm–midnight.
Racó de l’Abat C/Abat 2 977 780 371, abatrestaurant.com. Beamed ceilings and crimson plaster walls give this Catalan restaurant – located in a former palace dating from the sixteenth century – an intimate, heritage vibe. The menú del dia starts at €15, while most mains (fresh fish, grilled meats) cost around €12–16. June–Sept daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm; Oct–May Mon–Thurs & Sun 1–4pm, Fri 1–4pm & 8–11pm, Sat 8–11pm.
Reus
The charming little city of Reus, 100km southwest of Barcelona and 14km northwest of Tarragona, was the birthplace in 1852 of architect Antoni Gaudí, though there was little in his early life to indicate what was to come. He was born to a humble family of boilermakers and coppersmiths, and left for Barcelona when he was 16 years old. Even though there are no Gaudí buildings in Reus, however, it does hold a fascinating interpretive centre dedicated to its most famous son. The Gaudí Centre forms part of the city’s Ruta del Modernisme, a marked trail around the many buildings and mansions erected in the modernista style at the end of the nineteenth century and start of the twentieth, when Reus ranked as Catalunya’s second city after Barcelona, and was home to a merchant class made wealthy by the trade in wine and olive oil and, later, textiles, fabrics and ceramics. You can easily see all of Reus’s sights in a day out from Barcelona – it’s full of pretty squares, good restaurants and handsome pedestrianized shopping streets, with almost everything of note lying within a clearly defined circuit of boulevards.

Gaudí Centre
Pl. del Mercadal 3 • Mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 11am–2pm; mid-Sept to mid-June Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 11am–2pm • €9, under-14s €5, under-8s free • 977 010 670, gaudicentre.com
The Gaudí Centre, a gleaming building on the main square, throws considerable light on the inspiration, methodology and craftsmanship behind Gaudí’s work.
It’s not really a museum as such, though exhibits include copper vessels made by his father; school reports announcing the young Gaudí to be “outstanding” at geometry; his only surviving manuscript notebook; and a reconstruction of his study-workshop at the Sagrada Família. Instead, the centre cleverly investigates the architectural techniques pioneered by Gaudí, with meticulous hands-on models and audiovisual aids that explain, for example, how he created wave roofs and spiral towers. If you ever wondered why none of Gaudí’s door frames is straight, or what trees, ferns and snails have to do with architecture, this is undoubtedly the place to find out.
Casa Navàs
Pl. del Mercadal 5 • Tours every Sat at 10.30am, 11.30am & 12.30pm, check with Oficina de Turisme; reservations required • €10, under-7s free, includes Gaudí Centre
Antoni Gaudí may never have built in Reus, but his contemporary, Lluís Domènech i Montaner, was responsible for Reus’s finest townhouse, the magnificently decorated Casa Navàs (1901), across Plaça del Mercadal from the Gaudí Centre. It’s still privately owned, but is open for pre-booked tours of the virtually intact period interior, which you shuffle around in overshoes to protect the floor.
Plaça del Mercadal itself used to be the site of the general market – the numbers you can see etched in the square’s paving indicated the position of the stalls.
Sant Pere and around
Pl. de Sant Pere • Daily 10.30am–1pm & 4–8pm • Free
Reus’s main church, dedicated to its patron saint, Sant Pere, is a couple of minutes’ walk from the Gaudí Centre. This is where Gaudí was baptized (there’s a plaque by the baptismal chapel) and the church also boasts the heart of Reus’s number-two son, modernista artist Marià Fortuny i Marsal (the plaque here reads “he gave his soul to heaven, his fame to the world, and his heart to his country”).
The arcaded square with cafés behind the church, Plaça de les Peixateries Velles, was once the local fish market.
Gaudí’s birthplace
C/de Sant Vicenç 4
Divert a few minutes from the commercial centre to see Gaudí’s birthplace. The house is not original, but a plaque marks the site itself, and there’s a rather touching sculpture of the young Gaudí playing marbles outside a school just down the street.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: REUS
By plane Reus Airport, 3km east of town and served by Ryanair flights from the UK, offers connecting buses direct to Barcelona, while local bus #50 runs hourly into town, via the train station.
By train There are hourly Renfe services (renfe.com) to Reus (via Tarragona) from Pg. de Gràcia and Barcelona Sants; the journey takes 1hr 40min. Taxis wait outside the station, or you can walk to the centre in 15min – head down Pg. Sunyer, turn left at Pl. de les Oques, and follow C/Sant Joan to Pl. del Prim.
Oficina de Turisme Pl. del Mercadal, inside the Gaudí Centre (mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 11am–2pm; mid-Sept to mid-June Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun & hols 11am–2pm; 977 010 670, reusturisme.cat). You can pick up a good map of town, and ask about guided tours (not always in English).
EATING
Restaurants are plentiful, with a particular concentration around Pl. del Mercadal and along nearby C/Santa Anna. The daily market (Mon–Sat) takes place at the Mercat Central on C/Sant Joan, not far from the train station.

La Glorieta del Castell Pl. del Castell 2 977 340 826, restaurantlaglorietadelcastell.com. A traditional place, with market-led Catalan cuisine and good-value menús del dia day and night (from €17.50, otherwise €12–25). Mains include grilled bream with artichokes or roast duck with rosemary. Mon & Wed–Sat 1–4pm & 8.30–11.30pm, Sun 1–4pm.
Restaurant Joan Urgellès C/Aleus 7 977 342 178, joanurgelles.com. Top-notch contemporary cuisine, with excellent fresh seafood, like cod with apple aioli. Daily menus from €19.50. Mon 8.30–11pm, Tues–Sat 1.30–4pm & 8.30–11pm.
Reineta C/Jurats 28 977 313 296. Fill up on Catalan comfort food at this friendly family restaurant. Changing seasonal dishes include fresh cod, cannelloni filled with foie gras and rice topped with lobster. Tasting menus start at €25. Tues–Sat 1–4pm & 8.30–11pm, Sun 1–4pm.
Girona
The ancient walled city of GIRONA stands on a fortress-like hill, high above the Riu Onyar, 100km northeast of Barcelona but now barely forty minutes by train. Fought over in almost every century since this site held the Roman fortress of Gerunda, it has been rebuilt and added to many times: following the Moorish conquest of Spain, Girona was an Arab town for over two centuries, and there was also a continuous Jewish presence for six hundred years – which resulted in El Call, one of the best-preserved Jewish quarters in Europe. In short: Girona is an overwhelmingly beautiful medieval city, with old and new towns divided by the river, which is crisscrossed by footbridges, with pastel-coloured houses reflected in the waters below. The compact wedge of land that comprises the old town contains all the sights and monuments, making historic Girona an easy and very enjoyable day-trip from Barcelona.

Catedral
Pl. de la Catedral • April–Oct Mon–Sat 10am–6.30pm (July–Aug 10am–7.30pm), Nov–March Mon–Sat 10am–5.30pm, Sun 1–5.30pm • €7, includes audio-guide, Sun free & under-7s free • catedraldegirona.org
The centrepiece of old Girona, its mighty Gothic Catedral, is approached by a magnificent flight of seventeenth-century Baroque steps. Inside, there are no aisles, just one tremendous Gothic nave vault with a span of 22m. Such emphasis on width and height is a defining feature of Catalan-Gothic “hall churches”, of which this is the ultimate example. The cathedral treasures include the famous eleventh-century “Creation Tapestry”, the finest surviving specimen of Romanesque textile. But it’s the exquisite Romanesque cloisters (1180–1210) that make the strongest impression, boasting minutely carved figures and scenes on double columns.
Banys Àrabs
C/Ferran el Catòlic • March–Oct Mon–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; Nov–Feb Mon–Sat 10am–2pm • €2, under-16s €1 • 972 190 797, banysarabs.org
The intact remains of Girona’s Banys Àrabs, reached via the twin-towered Portal de Sobreportas below the cathedral, are the best-preserved ancient baths in Spain after those at Granada. Despite the name, they date from the thirteenth century, a couple of hundred years after the Moors’ occupation of Girona had ended, and they’re a very graceful blend of Romanesque and Moorish elements, albeit probably built by Moorish craftsmen. It only takes fifteen minutes or so to explore the three principal rooms, each designed for different temperatures, with an underfloor heating system.
Museu d’Història de Girona
C/de la Força 27 • May–Sept Tues–Sat 10.30am–6.30pm, Sun 10.30am–1.30pm; Oct–April Tues–Sat 10.30am–5.30pm, Sun 10.30am–1.30pm • €4, under-16s free • 972 222 229, www.girona.cat/museuhistoria
Girona’s excellent history museum, the Museu d’Història de Girona, a couple of streets down from the cathedral, traces the city’s story from its origins as Parva Gerunda up to the Franco era. Its most beautiful exhibits are unquestionably its Roman mosaics, but there’s an especially interesting room devoted to the trades practised in the medieval city. The museum staff can offer suggestions on historical walking tours around the city, which are also well marked on their website (and downloadable in PDF form).
Museu Arqueològic
Monestir de Sant Pere de Galligants, C/Santa Llúcia 8 • May–Sept Tues–Sat 10.30am–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; Oct–April Tues–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun 10am–2pm • €4.50, under-8s free • 972 202 632, www.mac.cat
From the cathedral square, the main street, Pujada Rei Martí, leads downhill to the Riu Galligants, a small tributary of the Onyar. The Museu Arqueològic stands on the far bank in the former monastic church of Sant Pere de Galligants, a harmonious setting for displays of Roman statuary, sarcophagi and mosaics. The beautiful Romanesque cloisters contain heavier medieval relics, such as inscribed tablets and stones, including some bearing Jewish inscriptions.
Passeig Arqueològic
Daily 8am–10pm • Free
Near the archeological museum, steps up through landscaped grounds lead onto the walls of the old city. You can walk right around their perimeter on the Passeig Arqueològic, or archeological route, and enjoy views out over the rooftops and the cathedral. There are endless little diversions along the way, into old watchtowers, down blind dead ends and around crumpled sections of masonry.
The Jewish quarter
Quite apart from its Roman remains and Arab influences, Girona also contains one of the most intact Jewish quarters in Western Europe, El Call, on and around C/de la Força. At its height it was home to around three hundred people who formed a sort of independent town within Girona, protected by the king in return for payment. From the eleventh century onwards, however, the Jewish community suffered systematic persecution and, until the expulsion of the Jews from Spain in 1492, the quarter was effectively a ghetto, its residents restricted to its limits and forced to wear distinguishing clothing if they did leave.
Museu d’Història dels Jueus
C/Força 8 • July & Aug Mon–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 10am–2pm; Sept–June Mon, Sun & hols 10am–2pm, Tues–Sat 10am–6pm • €4, free 1st Sun of month • 972 216 761, girona.cat/call
For an impression of the cultural and social life of Girona’s medieval Jewish community, visit the Museu d’Història dels Jueus, sited up the skinniest of stepped streets. It’s a huge, labyrinthine complex, much of it so heavily restored that you’d never be able to tell exactly which of its many rooms, staircases, courtyards and buildings held the synagogue, the butcher’s shop, the baths and other community buildings and services, but everything is very beautifully displayed and explained.
Museu del Cinema
C/Sèquia 1 • May, June & Sept Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 11am–3pm; July & Aug daily 10am–8pm; Oct–April Tues–Fri 10am–6pm, Sat 10am–8pm, Sun & hols 11am–3pm; • €5, under-14s free, free 1st Sun of month • 972 412 777, www.museudelcinema.cat
The superb Museu del Cinema, based on an extraordinary private collection, is less a museum and more of what the curators call “cinema before cinema”, with an utterly intriguing array of the gadgets and artefacts that provided popular entertainment before cinema itself came along, from Indonesian shadow puppets to eighteenth- and nineteenth-century devices like phantasmagoria, fantascopes and magic lanterns. It’s all rounded up with movie memorabilia including costumes from Tootsie and Hello Dolly.
Mercat del Lleó
Plaça Calvet i Rubalcaba • Mon–Thurs & Sat 7am–3pm, Fri 5–8pm • Free • 972 483 749, mercatlleo.cat
Barcelona has the famous Boqueria; Girona’s version is the Mercat del Lleó, a lively, colourful, aromatic market that unfolds just east of the river. The sixty-plus stalls reflect the natural diversity of Catalunya – apples and pears from fragrant Girona orchards, mushrooms pulled from Pyrennean soil, pungent goat cheeses and vast displays of still-twitching seafood from the Mediterranean. Take a twirl through the market for a whiff of local flavour, and then refuel over a café at the market bar.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: GIRONA
By plane Regular bus services run from Girona airport, 12km south of the city, to Girona, Barcelona or the Costa Brava.
By train Renfe trains (renfe.com) run at least hourly between Sants and Pg. de Gràcia stations in Barcelona, and Girona, with high-speed services taking around 37min and costing around €24 return, and slower trains taking between 1hr 15min and 1hr 40min and costing slightly less. All services arrive at the same station in Girona, across the river in the modern part of the city; the 10min walk to the old town is well signposted, and you can also take a taxi.
Oficina de Turisme Rambla de la Llibertat 1 (April–Oct Mon–Fri 9am–8pm, Sat 9am–2pm & 4–8pm, Sun & hols 9am–2pm; Nov–March Mon–Fri 9am–7pm, Sat 9am–-2pm & 3–7pm, Sun & hols 9am–2pm; 972 226 575, girona.cat/turisme).
EATING
Girona is a festive city, with myriad spots to enjoy cocktails and cuisine. Cafés and restaurants abound along Rambla de la Llibertat and the parallel Pl. del Vi, and there’s also a group of bars with lovely terraces at the opposite end of the old town, under Sant Feliu church. Another dozen or so restaurants, all with alfresco terraces, stand just over the river in pretty Pl. Independencia. Plus, Girona is home to this restaurant that’s on many culinary bucket lists: El Celler de Can Roca. Make reservations far in advance, and prepare to indulge – it’s worth it.

★El Celler de Can Roca Can Sunyer 48, off Yaialà road 2.5km northwest of the centre 972 222 157, cellercanroca.com. Eat your way across Catalunya at the spectacular, Michelin-starred El Celler de Can Roca, which was hailed as the world’s best restaurant by Restaurant magazine in 2013 and 2015. Founded by the three Roca brothers – head chef Joan, sommelier Josep and dessert master Jordi – the restaurant showcases dishes that celebrate the remarkably fertile region of Girona. Among the 17-plus courses: a tiny olive tree is hung with melting balls of olive-oil ice cream; and langoustine enveloped in a cocoa bean sauce is served in a bowl the shape of a cocoa bean. Tasting menus start at €175, and reservations are of course essential. Your best bet is to book online – reservations are accepted up to 11 months in advance; a new month becomes available at midnight on the 1st day of every month. Tues 9–11pm, Wed–Sat 1–3.30pm & 9–11pm; closed from end Dec to mid-Jan, 1 week in Aug and during Easter.
Divinum C/Albareda 7 872 080 218, divinum.cat. Sleek restaurant serving top-notch modern Catalan cuisine, with individual dishes like foie gras with black garlic or steak tartare at €14–26, and a wonderful €45 tasting menu (€73 with wine). Mon–Sat 1.30–3.45pm & 8.30–11pm.
König C/Calderes 16 972 225 782, konig.cat. With its pretty terrassa under the high walls of Sant Feliu church, this all-day café-bar makes a pleasant stop for a drink. Food (€4–8) is along the lines of salads, tapas, sandwiches and burgers. Daily 8am–midnight.
Rocambolesc C/Clara 50 972 416 667, rocambolesc.com. It doesn’t get much better than spooning up ice cream inside a gelateria that looks like a tiny candy factory. This adorable gelateria is run by Jordi Roca, the youngest brother and dessert chef at El Celler de Can Roca, along with his wife. Creative flavours include dulce de leche with guava jam and cotton candy, and caramelized apple with shortbread. Scoops from around €5. Mon–Thurs noon–9.30pm, Fri noon–11pm, Sat 11am–11pm, Sun 11am–9pm.
★Sentits Travessera de la Creu 33 972 299 386, restaurantsentits.com. Living up to its name, this elegant little spot appeals to all the senses (sentits). The menu springs from the hyper-local “Km 0” concept – seafood from the lonja (fish auction) at Blanes and Arenys de Mar, and vegetables from the gardens of the verdant Maresme along the Mediterranean. Dishes include smoked aubergine cream served with anchovies from nearby Escala. Mains €12–21. Mon–Thurs 1–4pm, Fri 1–4pm & 8–11pm.
Figueres and around
Figueres’ most famous resident has passed away – but his legacy lives on, and on, in this provincial town (pop: 45,700) in northern Catalunya. Salvador Dalí, who was born in Figeures, founded the eponymous Museu Dalí, which is installed in a building as surreal as the exhibits within. Figueres is a popular day-trip from Barcelona, as ultra-fast trains take less than an hour to make the 135km journey northeast of the city. The museum is very much the main event in town, though it’s easy to fill in the rest of the day in the handsome centre. Pavement cafés line the tree-shaded rambla, while art galleries, clothes stores and gift shops line the pedestrianized streets and squares. On Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, you’ll coincide with the main fruit, veg and flower market – Thursday is best, since there’s also a huge clothes market. As Figueres is a “tourist town”, shops in the historic centre are allowed to open on Sundays and holidays.
The surrounding Empordà wine region (doemporda.cat) holds as much allure as Figueres itself. This verdant wine country, which unfolds inland from the Costa Brava, has been producing wine since the fifth century when the Phoenicians first settled in the area. While mainly known for its naturally sweet Garnatxa, the region is undergoing a renaissance, with new, creative small-batch winemakers developing a wide variety of blends. Over fifty wineries fill the region, which is flanked by the Pyrenees on one side and the Mediterranean on the other, extending from Figueres north to the French border, and south through Baix Emporda. Rich soils and a balmy Mediterranean climate ensure a flourishing harvest, but there’s also something else that’s special to the region: the strong Tramuntana winds, which help protect the vines from disease and frost. Turisme Costa Brava Girona has launched a DO (Denominació d’Origen) Empordà Wine Route (costabrava.org/what-to-do/wine-and-gastronomy/wine-route), which features a range of recommended wineries, hotels and restaurants.

SURREAL SALVADOR
Salvador Dalí i Domènech (1904–89) was born in Figueres – you can see the exterior of his birthplace, which is marked with a plaque, at C/Monturiol 6, as well as that of the Dalí family’s next home, at no. 10. He gave his first exhibition in the town’s municipal theatre when he was just 14 and, after a stint at the Royal Academy of Art in Madrid (he was expelled), he made his way to Paris, where he established himself at the forefront of the Surrealist movement. A celebrity artist in the US in the 1940s and 1950s, he returned eventually to Europe where, among other projects, he set about reconstructing the now-defunct theatre. This opened as the Museu Dalí in 1974, which Dalí then fashioned into an inspired repository for his works.
By 1980, Dalí was growing increasingly frail. After suffering severe burns in a fire in 1984, he moved into the Torre Galatea, the tower adjacent to the museum, and controversy surrounded his final years. Spanish government officials and friends feared that he was manipulated in his senile condition. Allegations that he signed blank canvases has inevitably led to doubts over the authenticity of some of his later works. Dalí died in Figueres on January 23, 1989. His body now lies behind a simple granite slab inside the museum.
Museu Dalí
Pl. Gala i Salvador Dalí • March–May Tues–Sun 9.30am–6pm; June daily 9.30am–6pm; July & Sept daily 9am–8pm; Aug daily 9am–8pm & 10pm–1am; Oct Tues–Sun 9.30am–6pm; Nov–Feb Tues–Sun 10.30am–6pm; last admission always 45min before closing • €14, under-8s free • 972 677 500, salvador-dali.org
The Museu Dalí appeals to everyone’s innate love of fantasy, absurdity and participation. While it’s not a collection of Dalí’s greatest hits – those are scattered far and wide – what you do get beggars description, and should not be missed.
The building (a former theatre) is an exhibit in itself, topped by a huge metallic dome and decorated with a line of luminous egg shapes. Outlandish sculptures and statues adorn the square and facade, and things get even crazier inside, where the walls of the circular courtyard are ringed by stylized mannequins preparing to dive from the heights. Below sits the famous Rainy Cadillac, where you can water the snail-encrusted occupants of a steamy Cadillac by feeding it with coins. In the Mae West Room an unnerving portrait of the actress is revealed by peering through a mirror at giant nostrils, red lips and hanging tresses, while elsewhere you’ll find a complete life-sized orchestra, some of Dalí’s extraordinary furniture (like the fish-tail bed) and ranks of Surrealist paintings – including one room dominated by the ceiling fresco of the huge feet of Dalí and Gala (his Russian wife and muse).
The museum also contains many of Dalí’s own collection of works by other artists, from Catalan contemporaries to El Greco, and there are temporary exhibitions, too, while your ticket also allows admission to see the Dalí-Joies – a collection of extraordinary jewels, designed in the 1940s for an American millionaire and displayed here with Dalí’s original drawings.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: FIGUERES
By train High-speed trains from Barcelona Sants and Pg. de Gràcia take just 53min to reach the Figueres Vilafant TGV station, 1.5km west of the centre; somewhat less frequent slower trains from the same Barcelona stations take up to 2hr and stop at Figueres’ original station, 1km east of the centre. Both routes are operated by Renfe (renfe.com). Fares vary for each specific train, but broadly speaking you can expect to pay around €28 round-trip for the slower route, more like €36 for the faster one. All trains call at Girona, which is around 15min from Figueres on the fast route, 30–40min on the slower. The “Museu Dalí” is signposted from both Figueres stations, and there’s also a €2 bus from the TGV station.
Oficina de Turisme Pl. del Sol, in front of the post office building (late June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 9am–8pm, Sun 10am–3pm; mid-Sept to late June Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4–7pm, Sun 10am–2pm; 972 503 155, visitfigueres.cat).
EATING
A gaggle of largely missable tourist restaurants is crowded into the narrow streets around the Dalí museum, while more cafés and restaurants overlook the rambla. Lunch menus everywhere go for €10–14, with the sunniest seats to be found at the top of the rambla. Elsewhere, there’s a better selection of hidden-away restaurants that are more geared to locals, where the food tends to be more interesting and authentic.

Can Jeroni C/Castelló 36 972 500 983, canjeroni.com. Locals flock to this tiled tavern opposite the market, where country-style dishes and grills (torrades, salads, steaks, sausages) go for €8–19. Mid-Sept to mid-June Mon–Thurs 8am–3.30pm, Fri & Sat 8am–3.30pm & 8.30–10pm; mid-June to mid-Sept Mon, Tues & Sat 8am–3.30pm, Wed–Fri 8am–3.30pm & 8.30–10pm.
★El Motel Avgda. Salvador Dalí i Domènech 170 972 500 562, hotelemporda.com. When famous Catalan chefs talk about inspiration, one restaurant is regularly mentioned: El Motel, which is considered the birthplace of modern Catalan cuisine. Josep Mercader opened El Motel in 1961 in Figueres, where he brought together the elegance and creamy richness of French cuisine and the natural bounty of Catalunya. Mercader’s son-in-law, chef and hotelier Jaume Subirós, now runs this iconic restaurant, serving quietly profound Catalan dishes like a salad of pomegranate, ceps (porcini mushrooms) and pine nuts; and Empordà quail with pork cracklings. Mains €25. Daily 1–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Hotel Duran C/Lausaca 5 972 501 250, hotelduran.com. A top choice in town, known for its excellent regional cuisine, including fresh fish landed daily from the nearby coast. Mains €15–28, and there’s a reasonable lunchtime menu from €20. Daily 12.45–4pm & 8.30–11pm.
< Back to Out of the city




Eating
If you step no further than the Ramblas or the streets of the Barri Gòtic, you are not going to experience the best of the city’s cuisine – in the main tourist areas food and service can be indifferent and prices high. For the finest food the city has to offer, it pays to be a bit more adventurous and explore the backstreets of neighbourhoods like Sant Pere, La Ribera, El Raval and Poble Sec, where you’ll find excellent restaurants, some little more than hole-in-the-wall taverns, others surprisingly chic. Most, but not all, of the big-ticket, destination-dining restaurants are found in the Eixample. Gràcia, further out, is a nice village-like place to spend the evening, with plenty of good mid-range restaurants, while for fish and seafood you’re best off in the harbourside Barceloneta district or at the Port Olímpic.
Barcelona’s thousands of cafés keep the city fuelled from morning to night, and you’re rarely more than a step away from a coffee fix or a quick sandwich. Many are classics of their kind – century-old establishments or unique neighbourhood haunts – while others specialize in certain types of food and drink. A forn is a bakery, a pastisseria a cake and pastry shop, a xocolateria specializes in chocolate, while a granja (milk bar) offers traditional delights like orxata (horchata, tiger-nut drink) and granissat (granizado, a flavoured crushed-ice drink).
The tapas boom, meanwhile, shows no sign of abating, with increasing numbers of bars and restaurants figuring that small is beautiful when it comes to designing new menus. Little dishes are all the rage, and while there are still plenty of old-style, hanging-ham and counter-display tapas bars in town, there’s also a real sense of adventure in new-wave places that are deadly serious about their food. You’re as likely to get shrimp tempura, a samosa or a yucca chip as a garlic mushroom these days, while a few standout places offer classy, restaurant-standard experiences that are still truly tapas at heart.
Traditional Catalan and regional Spanish food remains at the core of many restaurant menus, while the city has the usual range of pizza places, curry houses, fast-food joints and the like. But these are exciting times for foodies in Barcelona, as contemporary Spanish cooking continues to be a big deal. The minimalist, food-as-chemistry approach, pioneered by best-chef-in-the-world Ferran Adrià (of El Bulli fame), has spawned a thousand followers, many with restaurants in Barcelona (and a fair few now with Michelin stars). The best are reinterpreting classic Catalan dishes in innovative ways, and while prices in these gastro-temples are high there’s a trend towards more economic, bistro-style dining even by the hottest chefs. Meanwhile, the current fad obsessing city restaurateurs is the fusion of Mediterranean and Asian flavours – a so-called “Mediterrasian” cuisine – that combines local, market-fresh ingredients with more exotic tastes. Sometimes this works, sometimes this doesn’t, but eating out in Barcelona has never been more interesting.
ESSENTIALS
COSTS AND RESERVATIONS
Prices Overall, eating out in Barcelona is still pretty good value, and you’ll be able to dine in a huge variety of restaurants for around €25–30 a head, and around the same if you jump from tapas bar to tapas bar. In fancier, fashionable places you can double this, while “tasting menus” at the current dining hotspots run from €70–120 a head, excluding drinks (still a lot cheaper than equivalents in, say, New York or London).
Getting a good deal Nearly all restaurants offer a weekday (Mon–Fri) three-course menú del dia (menu of the day) at lunchtime, with the cheapest starting at about €10, rising to €20–25 in fancier places. In many restaurants the price also includes a drink, so this can be a real bargain (at night, you might pay three or four times as much to eat dinner in the same restaurant).
Reservations and payment If there’s somewhere you’d particularly like to eat – certainly at the more fashionable end of the market – you should reserve a table. Some places are booked solid for days, or weeks, in advance. Credit and debit cards are widely accepted in restaurants, though not necessarily in cheaper places, traditional tapas bars and the like. Finally, all restaurant menus should make it clear whether the ten-percent IVA tax is included in the prices or not (it usually is).
STARTING THE DAY
Unless you’re staying somewhere with a decent buffet spread, you may as well pass up the overpriced coffee-and-croissant option in your hotel and join the locals for breakfast in one of the city’s bars, cafés or patisseries. A few euros will get you a hot drink and a brioche, croissant or sandwich just about anywhere – ensaïmades (pastry spirals) are a popular choice, while xocolata amb xurros (chocolate con churros – long, fried, tubular doughnuts with thick drinking chocolate) is a good cold-weather starter. The traditional country breakfast is pa amb tomàquet (pan con tomate) – bread rubbed with tomato, olive oil and garlic, perhaps topped with some cured ham or sliced cheese. Otherwise, breakfast sandwiches are whatever can be stuffed inside a flauta (thin baguette), from cured ham to a slice of truita (tortilla).
OPENING HOURS AND CLOSING DAYS
Opening hours Most cafés are open from 7 or 8am until midnight, or much later – so whether it’s coffee first thing or a late-night nibble, you’ll find somewhere to cater for you. Restaurants are generally open 1 to 4pm and 8.30 to 11pm, though most locals don’t eat lunch until at least 2pm and dinner after 9 or even 10pm. However, in tourist zones like the Ramblas and Port Olímpic, restaurants tend to stay open all day and serve on request, while many tapas bars are also open all day from morning until night.
Closing days and holidays Many restaurants close on Sunday or Monday, and on public holidays, and lots close over Easter and throughout August – check the listings for specific details but expect changes, since many places imaginatively reinterpret their own posted opening days and times.
MENUS
Dishes and specialities To ask for a menu, request la carta, though be warned that some cheaper places might not have a written menu, with the waiter merely reeling off the day’s dishes at bewildering speed.
A warning Budget meals sometimes come in the form of a garishly photographed plat combinat (plato combinado, combined plate) of things like eggs, steak or calamari with fries and salad, but generally speaking, pictures of dishes on a menu is not an indicator of great cuisine – especially so in the case of the pre-prepared paellas advertised on boards outside tourist restaurants.
THE RAMBLAS
CAFÉS
Cafè de l’Òpera Ramblas 74 933 177 585, cafeoperabcn.com; Liceu; map. If you’re going to pay through the nose for a Ramblas seat, it may as well be at one of the bank of sought-after pavement tables at this famous old café-bar opposite the opera house, which retains its fin-de-siècle feel. Surprisingly, it’s not a complete tourist-fest, and locals pop in day and night for drinks, cakes and tapas. Daily 8.30am–2.30am.
Cafe Zurich Pl. Catalunya 1 933 179 153; Catalunya; map. The most famous meet-and-greet café in town, right at the top of the Ramblas underneath El Triangle shopping centre. It’s good for croissants and breakfast sandwiches and there’s a huge pavement terrace, but sit inside if you don’t want to be bothered by endless rounds of buskers and beggars. Mon–Fri 8am–11pm, Sat 9am–midnight, Sun 9am–11pm.
Escribà Ramblas 83 933 016 027, escriba.es; Liceu; map. “We don’t just make pastries, we create illusions”, claims the renowned Escribà family business. Visit their classy, historic modernista-designed pastry shop in the Antiga Casa Figueras near the Boqueria market and find out why many rate this as the best bakery in Barcelona. Daily 9am–10pm.
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Bar Central La Boqueria Mercat de la Boqueria, Ramblas 91 933 011 098; Liceu; map. This gleaming, chrome stand-up bar in the market’s central aisle is the venue for ultra-fresh market produce, served by snazzy staff who work at a fair lick. Breakfast, snack or lunch, it’s all the same to them – salmon cutlets, sardines, calamari, razor clams, hake fillets, sausages, pork steaks, asparagus spears and the rest, plunked on the griddle and sprinkled with salt. Breakfast costs just a few euros or it’s €5–15 for some tapas or a main dish and a drink. Mon–Sat 8am–8pm.
Bar Pinotxo Mercat de la Boqueria, Ramblas 91 933 171 731, pinotxobar.com; Liceu; map. The market’s most renowned refuelling stop – just inside the main entrance on the right – attracts traders, chefs, tourists and celebs, who stand three deep at busy times. A coffee, a grilled sandwich and a glass of cava (no, really) is the local breakfast of choice, or let the cheery staff steer you towards the tapas and daily specials (€5–15) – anything from a slice of tortilla to fried baby squid. Daily 6.30am–4pm.
CentOnze Ramblas 111 933 164 660, centonzerestaurant.com; Liceu; map. Located in the sleek Le Méridien, this restaurant boasts great street-level views of Las Ramblas, and is a perfect place to escape the hustle and bustle while dining on Boqueria-sourced dishes such as salmon and monkfish carpaccio, strawberry gazpacho and arròs negre with fresh clams and aioli (€16/€24.50 lunch menu, €12–25 à la carte main course). Daily 7–11am (breakfast), 12.30–11pm.
Opera Samfaina Ramblas 51 934 817 971, operasamfaina.com; Liceu; map. A surrealist (and kitschy) fantasy landscape sets the stage for a one-of-a-kind tapas-and-movie experience (Odyssey, €33). Alternatively, hit the multiple bars beyond the viewing room that serve local wines and tapas created by star chefs (€2–12). Mon & Wed–Sun noon–1am.
BARRI GÒTIC
CAFÉS
Bar del Pi Pl. de Sant Josep Oriol 1 933 022 123, bardelpi.com; Liceu; map. Located on one of Barcelona’s prettiest squares, Bar del Pi is best known for its terrace tables. Linger over drinks and sandwiches and let the old town reveal its charms, especially during the weekend artists’ market. Tues–Fri 9am–11pm, Sat 10am–11pm, Sun 10am–10pm.
Caelum C/Palla 8 933 026 993, caelumbarcelona.com; Liceu; map. The lovingly packaged confections in this upscale café-cum-deli (the name is Latin for “heaven”) are made in convents and monasteries across Spain. Choose from frutas de almendra (marzipan sweeties) from Seville, Benedictine preserves or Cistercian cookies – or hunker down for cakes and coffee in the atmospheric basement crypt. Mon–Thurs 10.30am–8.30pm, Fri & Sat 10.30am–11pm, Sun 10.30am–9pm.
Dulcinea C/Petritxol 2 932 311 756; Liceu; map. One of the old town’s age-old treats is to come here for a thick hot chocolate, slathered in cream. Then if you’ve still got room, try one of their pastries or perhaps a dish of mel i mató (curd cheese with honey). It’s a bygone-era kind of place, with dickie-bow-wearing waiters patrolling the beamed and panelled room bearing silver trays. Daily 9am–1pm & 5–9pm.
Mesón del Café C/Llibreteria 16 933 150 754; Jaume I; map. Offbeat locals’ café, great for quick coffees, and perhaps a tapa or two. You’ll probably have to stand, though there is a sort of cubbyhole at the back with a few tables. Mon–Fri 7am–10pm, Sat & Sun 9am–midnight.
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Bar Celta Pulpería C/Mercè 16 933 150 006; Drassanes; map. This brightly lit, no-nonsense Galician tapas bar specializes in typical dishes like octopus (pop gallego) and fried green pimientos (peppers), washed down with heady regional wine (dishes €3–16). You eat at the U-shaped bar or at tables in the back room, and while it’s not one for a long, lazy meal, it’s just right to kick off a bout of bar-hopping. Daily noon–midnight.
Bidasoa C/Serra 21 933 818 063; Drassanes; map. Tucked away on a narrow street in La Mercè, this third-generation-owned restaurant offers simple and fresh Catalan and Basque-Navarre fare at a good price (€6–10). Dishes include tapas, soups, salads and tortillas, as well as hearty mains such as garlic chicken and the house speciality (and sure-fire hangover cure) cocido Bidasoa, a medley of sausage, tender beef and chickpeas in a savoury broth – all of which are served by jocular staff in a bright, rustic dining room. Tues–Thurs 1–4pm & 8–11pm, Fri & Sat 1–4pm & 8pm–midnight, Sun 1–4pm.
Bobo Pulpín Frenería 5 936 393 213, bobopulpin.com; Jaume I; map. This tapas bar may look like a kids’ toy shop but the food is no joke. The star attractions are six international octopus-based dishes (including classic Galician pulpo, €12.60) but everything here is good, from the razor clams in olive oil (€12) to a light “puri” salad (€8). Tues–Sat noon–11.30pm, Sun noon–4pm.
Bodega La Plata C/Mercè 28 933 151 009, barlaplata.com; Drassanes; map. A classic taste of the old town, with a marble counter open to the street and dirt-cheap wine served straight from the barrel. It attracts an enthusiastic local crowd, from businessmen to pre-clubbers, and for €2.50 you can get a dish of the speciality anchovies, either marinated or deep-fried like whitebait. Daily 9am–3.30pm & 6.30–11pm.
Café de l’Acadèmia C/Lledó 1 933 198 253; Jaume I; map. Great for a date or a lazy lunch, with creative Catalan cooking served in a romantic stone-flagged restaurant or outside in the medieval square, lit by candles at night. Expect succulent meat grills, fresh fish, rice dishes and a taste of local favourites like bacallà (salt cod), wild mushrooms or grilled vegetables. Prices are pretty reasonable (mains €12–20) and it’s always busy, so dinner reservations are essential. A no-choice menú del dia is a bargain for the quality (and it’s even cheaper eaten at the bar). Mon–Fri 1.30–4pm & 8.30–11.30pm; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
Can Culleretes C/Quintana 5 933 173 022, culleretes.com; Liceu; map. Supposedly Barcelona’s oldest restaurant (founded in 1786), serving straight-up Catalan food (botifarra sausage and beans, salt cod, spinach and pine nuts, wild boar stew) in cosy, traditional surroundings. Local families come in droves, especially for celebrations or for Sun lunch, and there are good-value set meals available at both lunch and dinner (around €30, otherwise mains €8–20). Tues–Sat 1.30–4pm & 9–11pm, Sun 1.30–4pm; closed 4 weeks in July/Aug.
El Salón C/Hostal d’en Sol 6–8 933 152 159, Jaume I; map. It’s easy to fall for the cosy charms of El Salón, with its candlelit tables in a Gothic dining room and summer terrace in the nearby square. The menu changes every few months, with inventive salads giving way to things like a confit of cod with spinach, pine nuts and raisins, or lamb with mustard-and-honey sauce. Most mains are in the range €10–16. Mon–Sat 7pm–midnight.
Shunka C/Sagristans 5 934 124 991, koyshunka.com; Jaume I; map. The first in the small but mighty Shunka empire, which now numbers four establishments, including one (Koy Shunka) with a Michelin star. Advance reservations are essential, though you might strike lucky if you’re prepared to eat early or late. The open kitchen and the bustling staff are half the show, while the food – sushi to udon noodles, Japanese fried chicken to grilled prawns – is really good. You can eat for around €40, though it’s easy to spend more. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm, Sat & Sun 2–3.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm; closed Aug.
Taller de Tapas Pl. de Sant Josep Oriol 9 933 018 020, tallerdetapas.com; Liceu; map. The fashionable “tapas workshop” sucks in tourists with its year-round outdoor terrace and pretty location by the church of Santa María del Pi. The open kitchen turns out reliable market-fresh tapas, with fish a speciality at dinner, from grilled langoustine to seared tuna (most tapas €5–11). There are several other branches around town, though this was the first and has the nicest location. Mon–Sat 8.30am–1am, Sun noon–1am.
La Viñatería del Call C/Sant Domènec del Call 9 933 026 092, lavinateriadelcall.com; Jaume I; map. The wood-table tavern is principally an eating place – with a long menu of cheese and ham platters, smoked fish, fried peppers and much more – but it’s also a great late-night bar, with a serious wine list and jazz and flamenco sounds as a backdrop. If you want to eat, especially at weekends, it’s best to reserve a table. Daily 7.30pm–1am.
NO SUCH THING AS A FREE LUNCH…
… except, once upon a time, in southern Spain. Tapas (from tapar, to cover) originated as free snacks given away as covers for drinks’ glasses, perhaps to keep the flies off in the baking sun. It’s still a much more southern, Andalucian thing, though the Basques, Gallegos and other northerners, all with their own tapas traditions, might disagree. In some parts of Spain, tapas still comes for free with drinks – a dish of olives, a bite of omelette, some fried peppers. But in Barcelona you can expect to pay for every mouthful…unless you count the restaurants which kick off proceedings with an amuse-gueule shot glass of soup or designer canapé – free to anyone just about to pay €100 for dinner. The classic old-town tapas bars tend to concentrate on specialities from the Spanish regions, like octopus, peppers and seafood from Galicia; cider, cured meats and cheese from Asturias; or the ubiquitous Basque-style pintxos, which are bite-sized concoctions on a slice of bread, held together with a cocktail stick (you’re charged by the number of sticks on your plate when you’ve finished). But contemporary tapas bars in Barcelona think nothing of mixing and matching cuisines, so you could just as easily be munching on a cold soba-noodle salad or a pint-sized lamb kebab.
EL RAVAL
CAFÉS
Café de les Delícies Rambla del Raval 47 934 415 714; Liceu; map. One of the first off the blocks in this revamped part of the neighbourhood, plonking thrift-shop chairs and tables beneath exposed pipes and girders and coming up with something cute, cosy, mellow and arty. There’s breakfast, sandwiches and tapas to share. Mon–Thurs 8.30am–11pm, Fri 8.30am–2.30am, Sat 11am–2.30am, Sun 11am–midnight.
Federal C/Parlament 39 931 873 607, federalcafe.es; Sant Antoni; map. Sunday brunch is the hottest ticket in town at this effortlessly cool café, squished into a corner townhouse with a great little roof garden on top. Australian owners have imported their own cool vibe, so whether you’re looking for a flat white and French toast, a bacon butty and a glass of New Zealand Sauvignon Blanc or a dandelion soy latte, you can guarantee that there’s nowhere else quite like this in Barcelona (apart, perhaps, from their second branch at Ptge. de la Pau 11 in the Barri Gòtic). Tues–Thurs 8am–11pm, Fri 8am–1am, Sat 9am–1am, Sun 9am–5.30pm.
Granja M. Viader C/Xuclà 4–6 933 183 486, granjaviader.cat; Liceu; map. The oldest traditional granja (milk bar) in town is tucked away down a narrow alley just off C/Carme, with a pavement plaque outside for services to the city. The original owner, Sr Viader, was the proud inventor of “Cacaolat” (a popular chocolate drink), but for a taste of the old days you could also try mel i mató (curd cheese and honey) or llet Mallorquina (fresh milk with cinnamon and lemon rind). Mon–Sat 9am–1.15pm & 5–9.15pm.
El Jardí C/Hospital 56 936 819 234; Liceu; map. The “garden bar”, hidden in the elegant courtyard of the Gothic Hospital de la Santa Creu is a real away-from-the-bustle find. Tables are arranged under the cool stone arches around a magical little garden, lit with candles and lanterns in the evenings. The menu features platters of cheese and hams, salads, sandwiches and a few simple tapas. Mon–Fri noon–midnight, Sat & Sun 1pm–midnight.
Kasparo Pl. de Vicenç Martorell 4 933 022 072; Catalunya; map. Sited in the arcaded corner of a quiet square, this tiny café and terrassa is popular with parents who come to let their kids play in the adjacent playground. There’s muesli, Greek yoghurt and toast and jam for early birds, while later in the day sandwiches, tapas and assorted platos del dia are on offer – hummus and bread, vegetable quiche, couscous or pasta, for example. Daily 9am–midnight; closed two weeks Dec/Jan.
THE CUP THAT CHEERS
Coffee in Barcelona is invariably espresso – a café sol (café solo) or simply un café. For decaff (descafeinat, descafeinado), make sure you ask for it de màquina (“from the machine”) to avoid an instant sachet. A slightly weaker large black coffee is a café americano. A tallat (cortado) is like a macchiato, ie a small strong black coffee with a dash of steamed milk; a larger cup with more hot milk is a café amb llet (café con leche). Chuck brandy, cognac or whisky into a black coffee and it’s a cigaló (carajillo), or add them to a tallat to make a trifàsic.
Tea comes without milk unless you ask for it, and is often just a teabag in a cup of hot water. If you do ask for milk, chances are it’ll be hot and UHT. Better to try an infusion, like mint (menta), camomile (camomila) or lime (tila).
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
4amb5 Mujades Rambla de Raval 45 936 815 093, suculent.com/4amb5/; Liceu; map. This not-quite-vegetarian restaurant puts prime, seasonal produce – often home-grown – in the spotlight. Some dishes include animal ingredients in supporting roles but it’s the vegetables you’ll applaud, in dishes such as fennel salad with apple and creamed goats’ cheese (€9). Mon & Wed–Sun 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm.
A Tu Bola C/Hospital 78 933 153 244, atubolarest.com; Liceu; map. Israeli chef Shira whips up falafel-like balls of fresh ingredients, to order, in unexpected but delightful flavour combinations. Home-made harissa, sauces and soft drinks bear hallmarks of the obsessive attention to detail that lifts this far above typical “street food” standard. There aren’t many seats so expect a wait at busy times, as the bargain prices (about €12 a head) keep people coming back for more. Mon, Wed, Thurs & Sun 1–11.30pm, Fri & Sat 1pm–1am.
Biocenter C/Pintor Fortuny 25 933 014 583, restaurantebiocenter.es; Liceu; map. One of the longest-running veggie places in town, with a restaurant-bar across the road from the original health-food store. The fixed-price lunch menu (€10.95, weekends €12.95) starts with soup and a trawl through the salad bar for a first course, followed by a daily changing choice of mains. For dinner, they dim the lights, add candles and sounds, and turn out a few more exotic dishes, from seitan in a white wine sauce to cheese and mushroom mezzelune (mains around €12). Mon–Sat 1–11pm, Sun 1–4pm.
Ca l’Estevet C/Valldonzella 46 933 024 186, restaurantestevet.com; Universitat; map. An unshifting rock in the fickle seas of foodie fashions, Ca l’Estevet has been serving up old-school Catalan cuisine to loyal local customers since 1940 (and, under a different name, for fifty years before that). The practice has made perfect; get a bellyful of the €18 lunch menu or tuck into the likes of grilled botifarra sausages, roasted kid or escudella i carn d’olla (meat stew), all for €10–20, under the guidance of a white-tux-wearing waiter. Mon–Sat 1–10.45pm, Sun 1–3.30pm.
Cera 23 C/Cera 23 934 420 808, cera23.com; Sant Antoni; map. It’s always 5 o’clock somewhere, so go ahead and start your meal at this charming Galicia-meets-the-Mediterranean bistro with an effervescent blackberry mojito, and then tuck into market-fresh dishes like grilled duck with apples, a black-rice-and-seafood “volcano” or almond-flavoured beetroot gnocchi in balsamic cream (mains €12–18). Mon & Sun 7–11pm, Tues–Sat 1–4pm & 7–11pm.
Dos Palillos C/Elisabets 9 933 040 513, dospalillos.com; Catalunya; map. Albert Raurich, former chef de cuisine at “world’s best restaurant” El Bulli, swapped Catalan food for Asian fusion after falling in love with Japan. Attached to the Casa Camper, his own Michelin-starred two-room restaurant offers à la carte dim sum in the front galley bar (steamed dumplings to grilled oysters and stir-fried prawns, mostly €5–7), and a back-room, counter-style Asian bar where tasting menus (€80 and €95) wade their way through the highlights. The front bar is a playful take on traditional Spanish tapas bars (cushions on upturned beer-crates, dusty liqueur bottles and steamer baskets); there are no reservations taken for this, though you do have to book for the Asian bar. Tues & Wed 7.30–11.30pm, Thurs–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 7.30–11.30pm; closed 2 weeks in Dec/Jan & 3 weeks in Aug.
Dos Pebrots C/Doctor Dou 19 938 539 598, dospebrots.com; Catalunya; map. Around the corner from Dos Palillos is Albert Raurich’s love letter to Mediterranean cuisine. The bar here was once a favourite spot for poets and off-duty chefs – including Raurich. Now transformed, it uses historical dishes such as Roman garum (anchovy sauce) as the basis for contemporary tapas and small dishes (€4–9 each). Don’t miss the pig’s nipples. Wed–Sun 1–11pm.
Elisabets C/Elisabets 2 933 175 826; Catalunya; map. Catalan home-cooking served at cramped tables in a jovial brick-walled dining room. Locals breakfast on a sandwich and a glass of wine, the hearty lunchtime menú del dia is hard to beat for price (€11) or you can just have tapas, sandwiches and drinks at the bar. Meals Mon–Sat 1–4pm, bar open Mon–Sat 7.30am–midnight; closed Aug.
Fonda España C/Sant Pau 9 935 500 000, hotelespanya.com/en/restaurante-fonda-espana/; Liceu; map. The beauty of this nineteenth-century Art Nouveau dining room threatens to distract from the food. Fortunately, the Fonda serves Catalan classics by star chef Martín Berasategui – such as potato trinxat with poached egg – that live up to the glorious modernista surroundings. The set menus (€27 lunchtimes, €35.50 evenings) are a bargain at this level. Daily noon–4pm & 8–11pm. No dinner Sun.
Mesón David C/Carretes 63 934 415 934, mesondavid.com; Paral.lel; map. This down-to-earth Galician bar-restaurant is a firm favourite with neighbourhood families who bring their kids before they can even walk. The weekday menú is a steal – maybe lentil broth followed by grilled trout and home-made flan – while traditional Galician dishes like octopus or the combinado Gallego (“ham, salami, ear”) go down well with the regulars. Lunch is around €10, otherwise most dishes €5–16, and there’s a good-natured bang on the clog-gong for anyone who leaves a tip. Daily noon–4pm & 8pm–midnight.
Romesco C/Sant Pau 933 189 381; Liceu; map. Old Barcelona hands talk lovingly of the Romesco – and as long as you accept its limitations (dining under strip-lights, gruff waiters) you can hardly go wrong, as the most expensive thing on the menu is a €10 grilled steak and most dishes go for €6 or less. It’s basic but good, with big salads, country broths and grilled veg to start, followed by bacallà a la llauna, or lamb chops or grilled prawns from the market, scattered with parsley and chopped garlic. If you spend more than €15 each you’ve probably eaten someone else’s dinner as well. Mon–Fri 1–11.30pm, Sat 1–4.30pm & 8–11.30pm; closed Aug.
Sesamo C/Sant Antoni Abat 52 934 416 411; Sant Antoni; map. This classy tapas place (with bar at the front and restaurant tables at the back) offers up a chalkboard menu of innovative organic dishes that are either vegetarian or vegan. Small and not-so-small dishes roll out of the open kitchen – think Catalan mushroom croquettes, gnocchi with beetroot and hazelnuts or grilled vegetables with goat cheese and rosemary, all in the range €7–22, or you could go for the set tapas menu for €25. The Catalan wines and cheeses are a high point too. Tues–Sun 7pm–midnight.
Suculent Rambla de Raval 43 934 436 579, suculent.com; Liceu; map. Star chef Carles Abellán and talented newcomer Toni Romero have teamed up to refine classic rustic dishes at this bistro. As well as meaning “succulent”, the name is a play on the Catalan words “sucar lent” – to dip slowly – and you’ll do just that, using the fresh, warm bread to mop up the sauces from dish after lip-smacking dish. The steak tartare on a split, grilled marrowbone (€16.50) will put hairs on your chest and bring tears of joy to your eyes. Taverna del Suculent a few doors down serves smaller, simpler dishes of similar fare. Wed–Sun 1–4pm & 8.30–11.30pm.
Teresa Carles C/Jovellanos 2 933 171 829, teresacarles.com; Catalunya; map. Stylish vegetarian and vegan cuisine served in a hip – but most certainly not “hippie” – space with soaring ceilings, exposed brick walls and soft, white lighting. The lunch menu (€10.50/€11.95 for 2 courses, €14.45 for 3 courses) is a great bargain, while à la carte offerings like artisanal pastas, a hearty seitan burger and vegan ceviche cost €9–12.50. Their second Barcelona outpost, Flax & Kale, is located nearby at C/Tallers 74. Brunch served until 2pm. Daily 9am–11.30pm.
SANT PERE AND LA RIBERA
CAFÉS
Bar del Convent Centre Cívic Convent de Sant Agustí, Pl. de l’Acadèmia, C/Comerç 36, Sant Pere 932 565 017, bardelconvent.com; Jaume I; map. The cloister café-bar in the converted old convent, now cultural centre, is good for drinks at any time and a bargain for lunch and light meals (expect to pay around €10 for lunch). In the evenings, it’s more of a bar, with a range of live shows, DJs and concerts. Tues–Sat 10am–9pm; closed Aug.
La Báscula C/Flassaders 30, La Ribera 933 199 866; Jaume I; map. An old chocolate factory in the backstreets has been given a hippy-chic makeover by a local cooperative and serves up veggie pasta dishes, turnovers, couscous, quiches and salads (around €9). Drinks are great too – dozens of teas, coffees, organic wines, juices and shakes – and it’s a cool break-from-the-shops spot. Wed–Sun 1–11pm.
Pim Pam Burger C/Sabateret 4, La Ribera 932 115 606, pimpamburger.com; Jaume I; map. The go-to choice for a quick bite, Pim Pam Burger is the place for burgers, fries, franks and sandwiches (€2.50–6). There are a few stools and tables if you’d rather not eat on the hoof, while Pim Pam Plats (pimpamplats.com), just around the corner on C/Rec, is their outlet for budget-beating take-home meals. Daily noon–midnight.
CATALAN FOOD AND DISHES
Traditional Catalan food places heavy emphasis on meat, olive oil, garlic, fruit and salad. The cuisine is typified by a willingness to mix flavours, so savoury dishes cooked with nuts or fruit are common, as are salads using both cooked and raw ingredients.
Meat is usually grilled and served with a few fried potatoes or salad, though Catalan sausage served with a pool of haricot beans is a classic menu item. Stewed veal and other casseroles are common, while poultry is sometimes mixed with seafood (known as mar i muntanya – “sea and mountain”) or fruit for tastes very definitely out of the Spanish mainstream. In season, game is also available, especially partridge, hare, rabbit and boar.
As for fish and seafood, you’ll be offered hake, tuna, squid or cuttlefish, while the local anchovies are superb. Cod is often salted and turns up in esquiexada, a summer salad of salt cod, tomatoes, onions and olives. Fish stews are a local speciality, though the mainstays of seafood restaurants are the rice- and noodle-based dishes. Paella comes originally from Valencia, but as that region was historically part of Catalunya, the dish has been enthusiastically adopted as Catalunya’s own. More certainly Catalan is fideuà, thin noodles served with seafood – you stir in the fiery all i olli (garlic mayonnaise) provided. Arròs negre (black rice, cooked with squid ink) is another local delicacy.
Vegetables rarely amount to more than a few French fries or boiled potatoes, though there are some authentic Catalan vegetable dishes, like spinach tossed with raisins and pine nuts, or samfaina, a ratatouille-like stew. Spring is the season for calçots, huge spring onions, which are roasted whole and eaten with a spicy romesco dipping sauce. Autumn sees the arrival of wild mushrooms, mixed with rice, omelettes, salads or scrambled eggs. In winter, a dish of stewed beans or lentils is also a popular starter, almost always flavoured with bits of sausage, meat and fat.
For dessert, apart from fresh fruit, there’s always crème caramel (flan in Catalan) – fantastic when home-made – though crema Catalana is the local choice, more like a crème brûlée, with a caramelized sugar coating. Or you might be offered músic, nuts and dried fruit served with a glass of sweet moscatel wine.
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Bacoa Avgda. del Marquès de l’Argentera 1, La Ribera 933 107 313, bacoaburger.com; Barceloneta; map. Aussie chef Brad Ainsworth runs this gourmet burger outlet, which has expanded to six venues across the city. Great-tasting artisan bread rolls and home-made sauces set the tone, while a dozen superb burgers (€6–10) come any way you like, from Catalan (with a roast garlic allioli) to Japanese (teriyaki sauce). Daily 1pm–1am.
El Bitxo C/Verdaguer i Callis 9, Sant Pere 932 681 708; Urquinaona; map. This is a great find for drinks and tapas, very close to the Palau de la Música Catalana. It’s tiny (four small wooden tables and a line of bar stools) but there’s a friendly welcome, and the food is good, especially the cured and smoked meats and sausages and regional cheeses (dishes up to €10). Daily 1pm–midnight.
Cal Pep Pl. de les Olles 8, La Ribera 933 107 961, calpep.com; Barceloneta; map. There’s no equal in town for fresh-off-the-boat and out-of-the-market tapas. You will have to queue (there are no reservations), and prices are high for what’s effectively a bar meal (up to €50 a head), but it’s definitely worth it for the likes of impeccably fried shrimp, grilled sea bass, Catalan sausage and beans, and baby squid and chickpeas – the whole show overseen by Pep himself bustling up and down the counter. Mon 7.30–11.30pm, Tues–Fri 1–3.45pm & 7.30–11.30pm, Sat 1–3.45pm; closed Easter week & last 3 weeks in Aug.
Casa Delfín Pg. del Born 36, La Ribera 933 195 088; Jaume I; map. There are many reasons to like this bubbly, updated taverna, not least its sunny terrassa outside the old market. It’s a slick operation, inside and out, with a long menu that takes a loving look at traditional Catalan dishes, from grilled farmhouse sausage and white beans to crispy artichoke hearts with romesco sauce. It’s served tapas-style, so you don’t have to come for a full meal (dishes €5–20), but if you’ve got room don’t miss English owner Kate’s signature pudding, Eton Mess. Mon–Thurs 8am–midnight, Fri & Sat 8am–1am.
Casa Mari y Rufo C/Freixures 11, Sant Pere 933 197 302; Jaume I; map. A great place for no-frills market cooking, with a busy family at a smoky range turning out quick-fried sardines, grilled Catalan sausage, stewed oxtail, steak and chips and the like – or ask what’s good from the Mercat Santa Caterina fish stalls that day. Expect whitewashed walls, bare light bulbs and chipped tiles, but with lunch for an unbeatable €12 and dinner for around €30, the locals know a good deal when they see one. Mon–Wed 8am–6pm, Thurs & Fri 8am–2am, Sat noon–2am.
Le Cucine Mandarosso C/Verdaguer i Callís 4, Sant Pere 932 690 780; Urquinaona; map. Naples meets Barcelona in this tiny space near the Via Laietana. It’s crowded and cramped but the top-value southern Italian comfort food here is the real deal (the home-made cakes are so good you’ll buy more to take away). There are no reservations at lunchtimes so expect to queue with the locals for the chance to sample the €11 set menu. Tues–Sat 1.30pm–1am, Sun 1.30–5pm & 8pm–midnight.
Cuines Santa Caterina Mercat Santa Caterina, Avgda. de Francesc Cambó 16, Sant Pere 932 689 918, grupotragaluz.com/restaurante/cuines-santa-caterina; Jaume I; map. The handsome neighbourhood market has a ravishing open-plan restaurant, with tables set under soaring wooden rafters. Food in the restaurant touches all bases – pasta to sushi, Catalan rice to Thai chicken – with most things costing €9–12. Or you can just drink and munch superior tapas at the horseshoe bar. Bar Mon–Thurs & Sun 9am–11pm, Fri & Sat 9am–11.30pm; restaurant Mon–Thurs & Sun 1–4pm & 7.30–11pm, Fri 1–4pm & 7.30–11.30pm, Sat 1–4.30pm & 7.30–11.30pm.
Euskal Etxea Pl. de Montcada 1–3, La Ribera 933 102 185, euskaletxeataberna.com; Jaume I; map. The bar at the front of the local Basque community centre is great for pintxos – pint-sized tapas, held together by a stick. Just point to what you want (and keep the sticks so that the bill can be tallied at the end – most things are a couple of euros each). There’s a pricier restaurant out back with more good Basque specialities. Bar Mon–Thurs & Sun 10am–12.30am, Fri & Sat 10am–1am; restaurant 1–4pm & 7pm–midnight.
El Guindilla del Born C/Argenteria 53, La Ribera 933 104 294; Jaume I; map. A reliable respite from the tourist trail, this big, bright tapas restaurant also offers burgers, salads and takeaway pollastre a l’ast (rotisserie chicken). Despite the tourist-trap trappings, the food is very good, with fish (sourced from Barceloneta market) a particular strength. Try the mussels, the seafood salad and the grilled squid with Iberian ham (all €9–16). There’s a large terrace but even with the extra seats it gets full at busy periods and you can’t book. Mon–Thurs & Sun noon–1am, Fri & Sat noon–2am.
Llamber C/Fusina 5, La Ribera 933 196 250; Jaume I; map. In a former industrial warehouse facing the Mercat del Born cultural centre, renowned Asturian chef Francisco Heras has created a modern factory of first-rate tapas. Open 365 days a year, Llamber is a stylish “gastronomic tavern” with a wood-and-brick aesthetic that makes the most of the building’s heritage. There are full dishes for around €12–16 each, but the emphasis is very much on eating and drinking in groups. The wine list is full of bargains and the set lunch menu (€15) is one of the best in the area. Mon–Fri noon–1am, Sat & Sun noon–2.30am.
La Mercat Princesa C/Flassaders 21, La Ribera 932 681 518, mercatprincesa.com; Jaume I; map. Enjoy food from more than a dozen gourmet stalls (think plump Chinese dumplings, grilled artisan sausages and artfully mounded montaditos) at communal tables inside a restored fourteenth-century palace’s interior courtyard. It’s a great option, especially if your taste buds are pulling you in multiple directions. From €3 a dish depending on what you order. Mon–Thurs 1pm–midnight, Fri 1pm–12.30am, Sat 12.30pm–12.30am, Sun 12.30pm–11pm.
Mosquito C/Carders 46, Sant Pere 932 687 569, mosquitotapas.com; Jaume 1; map. Happy indeed are the locals for whom this is their neighbourhood drink-and-chow joint. The Asian tapas bar, festooned with hanging paper lanterns, pours artisan beers and offers an authentic, made-to-order dim sum menu (dishes €3–5), from shrimp dumplings to tofu rolls. Mon 7.30pm–1am, Tues–Sun 1pm–1am.
N.A.P. (Neapolitan Authentic Pizza) C/Gombao 5, Sant Pere 686 192 690; Jaume I; map. Italian staff. Italian ingredients. Italian pizza. Specifically, Neapolitan thin-base pizza. Like the best pizza places in Naples itself, N.A.P. is loud, chaotic, crowded and cheap (€6–9 per pizza). You’ll have to queue, then wait as the small wood-fired oven struggles to deal with the workload. But the result is probably the best pizza in town, with the possible exception of N.A.P.’s second, less-crowded branch on C/Baluard, in Barceloneta. Mon–Fri 1.30–4.30pm & 8pm–midnight, Sat & Sun 1.30pm–midnight.
Senyor Parellada C/Argenteria 37, La Ribera 933 105 094, senyorparellada.com; Jaume I; map. An utterly gorgeous renovation of an eighteenth-century building is the mellow backdrop for genuine home-style Catalan cuisine – octopus braised with potato hash, sautéed vegetables and pork belly, duck with figs, garlicky roasted lamb. Most dishes cost between €8 and €15, while more than a dozen puds await those who struggle through. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm.
Set Portes Pg. d’Isabel II 14, La Ribera 933 193 033, 7portes.com; Barceloneta; map. A wood-panelled classic with the names of its famous clientele much to the fore – they’ve all eaten here, from Errol Flynn to Yoko Ono. The decor in the “Seven Doors” has barely changed in almost two hundred years and, while very elegant, it’s not exclusive – you should book ahead, though, as the queues can be horrendous. The renowned rice dishes are fairly reasonably priced (€16–22), but for a full meal you’re looking at around €60 a head. Daily 1pm–1am.
El Xampanyet C/Montcada 22, La Ribera 933 197 003; Jaume I; map. Traditional blue-tiled bar doing a roaring trade in sparkling cava, cider and tapas – anchovies are the speciality, but there’s also marinated tuna, spicy mussels, sun-dried tomatoes, sliced meats and cheese. As is often the way, the drinks are cheap and the tapas turn out to be rather pricey (€5–9 each, and portions aren’t generous), but there’s usually a good buzz about the place. Tues–Sat noon–3.30pm & 7–11pm, Sun noon–3.30pm; closed Aug.
BARCELONA’S BEST BURGERS
Take one financial crisis, add locals looking for value-for-money dining and the current rage for burger bars becomes more understandable. Of course, being Barcelona, we’re talking stylish, gourmet burger places, like the crowd-pleasing Bacoa, where artisan-made bread, organic beef, hand-cut fries and perky, home-made sauces keep the punters happy. A couple of great bars also get honourable burger bravos, namely Betty Ford’s and Cervecería Jazz, while Makamaka in La Barceloneta earns top marks for its juicy burgers and ample outdoor seating. Relative newcomer De Paula makes a strong case to be considered the king of them all, with a winning combo of top quality, charm and relative cheapness.


PORT VELL AND BARCELONETA
CAFÉ
Vioko Pg. de Joan de Borbó 74, Barceloneta 932 210 652, vioko.es; Barceloneta; map. Quite simply, the slinkiest, swishiest ice-cream and chocolate shop in town – Vioko’s minimalist white curves serve as the backdrop for artisan gelati in flavours such as banana split or pomelo and jasmine, gourmet chocolates and coffee, rainbows of airy macaroons, ready to take away on a stroll along the marina. Daily 10am–10.30pm.
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
1881 Per Sagardi Pl. de Pau Vila 3, Barceloneta 932 210 050, sagardi.com; Barceloneta; map. Ride the escalators to the roof of the waterfront Museu d’Història de Catalunya and you’ll be met with the smell of wood smoke. A huge grill dominates the glass-walled 1881 per Sagardi, churning out Basque dishes like magnificent txuletón steaks and Catalan dishes like artichokes with romesco sauce. Main courses are about €24–31 each, but it’s worth paying just to sit on the terrace, which also serves a mean Martini, and watch the yachts sailing in and out of the harbour. Daily 1pm–midnight; terrace daily 10am–12.30am, until 2am in summer.
La Barra de Carles Abellán Pg. de Joan de Borbó 19, Barceloneta 937 605 129, carlesabellan.com; Barceloneta; map. The hottest new opening on the Barceloneta promenade is this stylish temple of first-class seafood. Giant screens show the pristine fish and shellfish, much of it from the harbour across the street, being prepared in the kitchen, before the finishing touches are applied theatrically at a glowing wood-fired grill. A feast for the senses and a squeeze on your wallet: tapas ranges from €5–18 each and mains are €24–60. Open 365 days/year. Daily 1.30–4pm & 8–11.30pm; tapas 1.30–11.30pm.
Bravo 24 Hotel W, Pl. Rosa dels Venta 1 932 952 636, carlesabellan.com; Barceloneta; map. Within the high-glam hotel W hides an unexpectedly old-fashioned treat for foodies. Bravo 24, overseen by star chef Carles Abellan, tempts guests in with its world-class tapas but also offers a menu full of old-school Barcelona dishes like fricandó (beef stew), complete with historical descriptions of their origins. The combination of a drop-dead-gorgeous terrace overlooking the beach and next-level comfort food is a winner. Tapas ranges from €5–18 each and mains are €24–60. Open 365 days/year. Daily 1.30–4pm & 8–11.30pm; tapas 1.30–11.30pm.
Can Maño C/Baluard 12, Barceloneta 933 193 082; Barceloneta; map. This old-fashioned diner is packed with noisy locals around formica tables. Basically, your choice is fried or grilled fish, such as sardines, mullet or calamari, supplemented by a few daily seafood specials and basic meat dishes. Expect rough house wine and absolutely no frills, but it’s an authentic experience, which is likely to cost you less than €15 a head. Mon 8–11pm, Tues–Fri 8–11am, 12.15–4pm & 8–11pm, Sat 8–11am & 12.15–4pm; closed Aug.
Cova Fumada C/Baluard 56, Barceloneta 932 214 061; Barceloneta; map. Behind brown wooden doors on Barceloneta’s market square (there’s no sign) is this rough-and-ready tavern with battered marble tables and antique barrels. It might not look like much but the food’s great, with ingredients straight from the market (tapas €2–10), from griddled prawns to fried artichokes. Mon–Wed 9am–3.15pm, Thurs & Fri 9am–3.15pm & 6–8.10pm, Sat 9am–1.20pm; closed Aug.
Green Spot C/de la Reina Cristina 12, Barceloneta 938 025 565, encompaniadelobos.com/the-green-spot; Barceloneta; map. Vegetarian and vegan restaurants good enough to keep omnivores happy too are rare in Barcelona. Green Spot fits the bill, even though its fun, fresh, international dishes (mains €10–15) aren’t quite as refined as its oak-panelled decor. There’s live music on Tuesday nights. Mon–Fri 12.30pm–midnight, Sat & Sun 1pm–midnight (drinks served until 2am).
Jai-Ca C/Ginebra 9 & 13, Barceloneta 932 683 265; Barceloneta; map. Always a winning choice for seafood tapas, with bundles of razor clams, plump anchovies, stuffed mussels and other platters piled high on the bar. Meanwhile, the fryers in the kitchen work over-time, turning out crisp baby squid, fried shrimp and little green peppers scattered with rock salt. Take your haul to a tile-topped cane table, or outside onto the tiny street-corner patio. The second location at no. 9 also has a patio and serves the same menu. Dishes up to €10. Both locations daily 9am–11.30pm.
Kaiku Pg. de Joan de Borbó 74, Barceloneta 932 219 082, restaurantkaiku.cat; Barceloneta; map. You really need to book for this place because the secret is out – a prime location on the seafront terrace for fantastic, Basque-influenced seafood meals (dishes €9–20, cheaper lunch menu served Tues–Fri). The ingredients are first-rate, from fresh fish to rice from the famous growing area of Delta de l’Ebre, and tastes are out of the ordinary – think smoked vegetable rice with mushrooms and rocket, or steamed mussels with thyme. Tues–Sun 1–3.30pm; plus June–Aug 7–10.30pm.
La Mar Salada Pg. de Joan de Borbó 58, Barceloneta, 932 212 127, lamarsalada.cat; Barceloneta; map. While many of the classic fish restaurants in Barceloneta have let standards slip under the groaning weight of tourist numbers, the young team at La Mar Salada have instead raised the bar. Buying freshly landed fish straight from the dock directly opposite, they offer refined, creative variations of great seafood dishes at bargain prices. The €19 lunchtime menú del dia is outrageously good value, and there’s even a sunny terrace to eat it on. Mon–Fri 1–4pm & 8–11pm, Sat & Sun 1–11pm.
Pez Vela Pg. del Mare Nostrum 19/21 932 216 317, grupotragaluz.com; Barceloneta; map. At the base of the towering W hotel this restaurant styled on a “chiringuito” (beach bar) serves excellent paella and rice dishes, plus seafood such as clams and Galician-style octopus, from its sunny terrace. It’s hard to beat for simple waterfront dining, and main courses for €14–27 are reasonable given the swish location. There’s also a €35 set lunch. Daily 1pm–midnight.
Somorrosto C/Sant Carles 11, Barceloneta 932 250 010, restaurantesomorrostro.com; Barceloneta; map. Creative “boat-to-table” Mediterranean cuisine with a mission: preserving and promoting the livelihood and traditions of this fishing community. The three-course evening menu (from €17) is excellent value, and it’s great fun to watch the open kitchen in action. Daily 1pm–midnight.
Vaso de Oro C/Balboa 6, Barceloneta 933 193 098, vasodeoro.com; Barceloneta; map. If you can get in this corridor of a bar you’re doing well – Sunday lunch is particularly busy – and there’s no menu, but standard bites include patatas bravas, fried sausage and tuna salad, with fancier shellfish dishes and meat grills available too (most tapas €4–15). Unusually, they also brew their own beer – light, dark and IPA – which comes in tall schooners. Daily 11am–midnight; closed 3 weeks Sept.
IT TAKES TWO
You want a seafood paella or an arròs negre (black rice, with squid ink), or maybe a garlicky fideuà (noodles with seafood). Of course you do. Problem is, you’re on your own and virtually every restaurant that offers these classic Barcelona dishes does so for a minimum of two people (often you don’t find out until you examine the menu small print). Solution? Ask the waiter upfront, as sometimes the kitchen will oblige single diners, or look for the dishes on a menú del dia (especially on Thursdays, traditionally rice day), when there should be no minimum. Probably best not to grab a stranger off the street to share a paella, however desperate you are.
PORT OLÍMPIC AND POBLE NOU
CAFÉ
El Tío Ché Rambla del Poble Nou 44–46, Poble Nou 933 091 872, eltioche.es; Poblenou, or bus #36 from Barceloneta; map. A down-to-earth café in a down-to-earth neighbourhood, run by the same family for four generations. The specialities are orange or lemon granissat (crushed ice) and their famous orxata (tiger-nut drink), but there are also torrons (almond fudge), hot chocolate, coffee, croissants and sandwiches. It’s a bit off the beaten track, though you can stroll up easily enough from Bogatell beach (15min) or down the rambla from Poble Nou metro (10min). Daily 10am–10pm/midnight; reduced hours in winter.
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Agua Pg. Marítim 30, Port Olímpic 932 251 272, grupotragaluz.com; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. Much the nicest boardwalk restaurant on the beach-front strip, perfect for brunch, though if the weather’s iffy you can opt for the sleek, split-level dining room. The menu is contemporary Mediterranean – grills, risotti, pasta, salads and tapas – and the prices are pretty fair for such a prime spot (most dishes €10–23), so it’s usually busy. Daily noon–12.30am.
Arola Hotel Arts Barcelona, C/Marina 19–21, Port Olímpic 934 838 090, hotelartsbarcelona.com; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. Imaginative tapas by Michelin-starred chef Sergi Arola are served on a stunning terrace overlooking Frank Gehry’s “Fish” statue, with live music and DJs playing in the evenings in summer. It’s a classy, relaxed vibe and the food emphasizes fun not formality. It’s not cheap – about €40 for a simple lunch and double that for a full tasting menu – but quality like this always comes at a price. Mon, Thurs & Fri 1.30–3.30pm & 8–11pm, Sat 2–4pm & 8–11pm, Sun 1–4pm & 8–11pm.
Bestial C/Ramon Trias Fargas 2–4, Port Olímpic 932 240 407, grupotragaluz.com; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. Right beside Frank Gehry’s “Fish” (under the wooden bridge) you’ll find a stylish terrace-garden in front of the beach, great for an alfresco lunch. Inside the feel is sharp and minimalist, while the cooking is Mediterranean, with an emphasis on seafood. Tapas and starters are in the €5–13 ranges, with other dishes up to €25. Don’t miss the baked fish. At weekends there’s DJ music and drinks until 5am. Daily 1–4pm & 8pm–midnight.
El Cangrejo Loco Moll de Gregal 29–30, upper level, Port Olímpic  932 210 533, www.elcangrejoloco.com; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. The terrace at the “Crazy Crab” offers ocean views, and the food is excellent. A salt-cod salad or small fried fish are typically Catalan starters, and the rice dishes are thoroughly recommended. A meal costs from around €40. Daily 1pm–1am.
Enoteca Hotel Arts Barcelona C/Marina 19–21, Port Olímpic 932 211 000, hotelartsbarcelona.com; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. A contender for the crown of Barcelona’s best fine-dining restaurant, Enoteca contributes two Michelin stars to the five-star constellation of chef Paco Pérez. Everything here from the all-white dining room to the wine list and service is appropriately stellar. The food? A creative tour de force of modern Catalan cooking that will put a smile on your face – and a hole in your bank account. Tasting menu €175. Mon–Fri 7.30–11pm, Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 7.30–11pm; closed 2 weeks Dec.
Els Pescadors Pl. de Prim 1, Poble Nou 932 252 018, elspescadors.com; Poble Nou; map. The best top-class fish restaurant in Barcelona? It’s a tough call, but many would choose this hideaway place in a pretty square with gnarled trees in the back alleys of Rambla de Poble Nou. Lunch outside on a sunny day just can’t be beaten (reservations advised). The menu offers daily changing fresh fish dishes, and plenty more involving rice, noodles or salt cod (try the latter with samfaina, like a Catalan ratatouille). Most dishes cost €18–35 and if you don’t go mad with the wine list you’ll escape for around €60 a head. Daily 1–3.45pm & 8–11.30pm; closed 2 weeks Dec/Jan.
MONTJÜIC
Casa de Tapas Cañota C/Lleida 7 933 259 171, casadetapas.com; Poble Sec; map. This colourful, family-friendly tapas bar is an ideal spot to refuel over-tired children after a visit to Montjüic’s Magic Fountain. Adults can unwind with a fresh, cold beer pulled from pressurized copper tanks. The tapas are above average in both quality and price (tapas are in the €5–15 range). Tues–Sat 1.30–3.45pm & 8.30–10.45pm.
Espai Kru C/Lleida 7  934 248 152, espaikru.com; Poble Sec; map. Annexed to Cañota and upstairs from traditional – and extremely expensive – seafood restaurant Rías de Galicia, this creative restaurant gives deep-sea delicacies a more contemporary context. Expect cocktails, oysters and first-rate sashimi plus a handful of equally impressive meat dishes. Tues–Sat 1.30–4pm & 8–11pm, Sun 1.30–4pm.
POBLE SEC
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Bella Napoli C/Margarit 14 934 425 056, labellanapoli.es; Poble Sec; map. Authentic Neapolitan pizzeria, right down to the cheery waiters and cheesy pop music. The pizzas come straight from the depths of a beehive-shaped oven, or there’s a big range of pastas, risotti and veal scaloppine, with almost everything priced between €9 and €15. Daily 1.30–4.30pm & 8.30pm–midnight.
La Bodegueta C/Blai 47 934 420 846, labodeguetabcn.com; Poble Sec; map. A true Catalan taverna with food like mother used to make – a relaxed Sunday lunch here brings local families out in force. It’s a good-natured, red-check-tablecloth-and-barrels kind of place, specializing in torrades (cold cuts on toasted country bread), salads and grills (most dishes €7–16) – the excellent grilled veg platter is a good place to start. Daily 1.30–4pm & 8pm–midnight.
De Paula C/Creu dels Molers 65 931 646 980, depaula.cat; Poble Sec; map. The new kid on the burger block might just be the best in town. Charcoal grill? Check. Hand-chopped, quality meat? Check. Artisanal bread? Check. The burgers are posh but the prices (€6–9) and serving sizes will suit everyone. The only downside is the small size of the premises, despite a recent expansion. Try the local beers when you’re in there – if you can get a table. Mon, Tues & Thurs–Sat 1–4.30pm & 8–11.30pm, Wed 1–4.30pm.
Quimet i Quimet C/Poeta Cabanyes 25 934 423 142; Paral.lel; map. Poble Sec’s cosiest tapas bar is a foodie place of pilgrimage and at busy times everyone has to breathe in to squeeze another punter through the door. The wine bottles are stacked five shelves high (there’s a chalkboard menu of wines by the glass), while little plates of classy finger food (mostly €3–10) are served reverently from the minuscule counter – things like roast onions, marinated mushrooms, stuffed cherry tomatoes, grilled aubergine, anchovy-wrapped olives and a terrific range of regional cheeses. Mon–Fri noon–4pm & 7–10.30pm, Sat noon–4pm; closed Aug.
Tapería Lolita C/Tamarit 104 934 245 231, lolitataperia.com; Poble Sec; map. You might have to wait in line to see what all the fuss is about at Joan Martínez’s hip bar, which serves cocktails and classic tapas – or “small portions of happiness” – to tuned-in city folk and in-the-know tourists. You can eat and drink for around €25 – don’t miss the signature-dish patatas bravas or the creamy ensaladilla rusa. Tues–Thurs 7pm–midnight, Fri & Sat 1–4pm & 7pm–2.30am; Aug closes afternoons and at midnight.
Tickets Avgda. Paral.lel 164, online reservations only on elbarriadria.com; Poble Sec; map. The hullaballoo shows no sign of abating at Tickets, the swanky tapas bar under the star-studded helm of pastry-chef supremo Albert Adrià, his El Bulli-famed brother Ferran Adrià and the Iglesias brothers of the renowned Rías de Galicia seafood restaurant. It’s divided into half-a-dozen quirky seating areas that make a play on fairground and theatrical themes, and the terrifically inventive dishes (€5–20 each, expect to spend €70) mix impeccably sourced ingredients with the flights of fancy expected from the Adrià brothers. With only a hundred covers a night, and online reservations taken up to three months in advance, you can’t guarantee a table. Tues–Fri 7–11pm, Sat 1–3.30pm & 7–10.30pm; closed 3 weeks in Aug.
La Tomaquera C/Margarit 58 Poble Sec; map. Sit down in this chatter-filled tavern to a dish of olives and two quails’ eggs – and any delicacy ends there as the chefs set to hacking steaks and chops from great hunks of meat. It’s not for the faint-hearted, but the grilled chicken is sensational and the entrecôtes enormous (most mains €8–15). Locals limber up with an appetizer of pan-fried snails with chorizo and tomato. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.45pm & 8.30–10.45pm; closed Aug.
DRETA DE L’EIXAMPLE
CAFÉS
Café del Centre C/Girona 69 934 881 101; Girona; map. This quiet coffee stop is only four blocks from the tourist sights on the Pg. de Gràcia, but it’s well off the beaten track as far as most visitors are concerned. It’s well worth the walk for a café that’s been here since 1873 and that retains its elegant modernista decor, plus the lunch menu is a bargain at €9.90. Mon–Sat 9am–11pm; closed Aug.
WHAT’S COOKING?
The man behind the reimagining of modern cuisine – the foams, the essences, the vapours, the taste explosions, the deconstructed, laboratory-tested dishes – is Catalan chef Ferran Adrià, whose world-famous, triple-Michelin-starred restaurant El Bulli, on the Costa Brava, set the benchmark for creative contemporary cooking. El Bulli closed as a restaurant in 2011 – it is now a cookery foundation (elbullifoundation.com) and “centre for creativity” – though Adrià and his brother Albert also have a high-profile presence on the Barcelona dining scene with their new-wave tapas bar, Tickets, traditional vermut bar, Bodega 1900, and modern takes on Japanese cuisine (Pakta) and Mexican (Hoja Santa and Niño Viejo). Their most theatrical project yet, Enigma, opened early in 2017 and features a secret entrance code, an otherworldly, cloud-like interior, and a €220, forty-course tasting menu. Meanwhile, the Adrià effect has spawned a generation of regional chefs – many of them alumni of the El Bulli kitchens – who have helped put contemporary Spanish cuisine on the map. Talents like Jordi Vilà, Carles Abellán, Ramón Freixa and Fermí Puig are cooking right now in Barcelona, so it’s time to brush up on your chemistry and educate your tastebuds.
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Au Port de la Lune C/Pau Claris 103 934 122 224, auportdelalune.wordpress.com; Passseig de Gràcia; map. This no-nonsense French bistro has been a favourite of local foodies for years. The decor of French books and Serge Gainsbourg photos has one foot over the border of cliché, but the cooking is the real deal: oysters, excellent cheese and a cassoulet so good you’ll order more. Fussy eaters should look elsewhere: a sign reading “there’s no ketchup, no Coca-Cola, no Coca-Cola light, and there never will be” sets the tone. Lunch menus of €11.50–15 and an evening four-course menu for €25 are unbeatable value. Mon–Fri 8am–5pm & 6.30–11.30pm, Sat 10am–5pm & 6.30pm–midnight, Sun 11am–5pm.
La Bodegueta Rambla de Catalunya 100 932 154 894, labodegueta.cat; Diagonal; map. This long-established basement bodega serves cava by the glass, a serious range of other wines and good ham, cheese, anchovies and other tapas (€3–15) to soak it all up. In summer you can sit outside at tables on the pretty uptown rambla. Mon–Fri 7am–1.30am, Sat 8am–1.30am, Sun & hols 6pm–1.30am.
Casa Calvet C/Casp 48 934 124 012, casacalvet.es; Catalunya/Urquinaona; map. The wonderfully decorated townhouse built by a young Antoni Gaudí for a Catalan industrialist makes for a truly glam night out. The restaurant offers a seasonally changing, modern Catalan menu, with desserts that are artworks in themselves, though with mains around the €30 mark, a set lunch at €38 or tasting menus from €55 to €68, expect it to be a purse-emptying experience. Mon–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8.30–11pm; closed 1 week in Aug.
Ciutat Comtal Rambla de Catalunya 18 933 181 997; Passeig de Gràcia; map. The best of the large uptown tapas-hall-style places is a handy city-centre pit stop that caters for all needs. Breakfast sees the bar groan under the weight of a dozen types of crispy baguette sandwich, plus croissants and pastries, while the daily changing tapas selection (€4–12) ranges far and wide, from patatas bravas to octopus. It can be standing room only at lunchtime (and not much of that either), so get there early. Daily 8am–1.30am.
Embat C/Mallorca 304 934 580 855, bit.ly/FacebookEmbat; Verdaguer; map. Hidden a few streets away from the tourist traffic, this modern Catalan bistro has won the loyalty of locals over the past ten years by serving refined, first-class food at affordable prices – expect to pay €20–25 for a three-course lunch and double that for a slap-up evening meal. It’s a small, white, minimalist space where the money is spent on ingredients not interior designers. Many of the dishes are close to Michelin-star standard. Mon–Wed 8.30am–3.45pm, Thurs–Sat 8.30am–3.45pm & 8.30–11pm.
Moments Hotel Mandarin Oriental, Pg. de Gràcia 38–40 931 518 781, mandarinoriental.com/Barcelona; Passseig de Gràcia; map. Catalan chef Carme Ruscalleda is the only woman in the world to have seven Michelin stars. Her main restaurant, Sant Pau, up the coast in Sant Pol de Mar, is a three-star thing of wonder, but the two-star Moments, run by her son, Raul Balam, isn’t far behind. You’ll pay €171 for a mind- and budget-blowing tasting menu of exquisite beauty and refinement, set in an appropriately luxurious gold dining room. Tues–Sat 1–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Mordisco Pg. de la Concepció 10 934 879 656, grupotragaluz.com; Diagonal; map. With less of a look-at-me atmosphere than its sister restaurant Tragaluz, Mordisco turns your attention to the food instead. It’s fresh, rustic stuff straight from the charcoal grill, with excellent steak and seasonal mushroom dishes. You can even shop for fresh vegetables and deli ingredients here. That’s not to say that style takes a back seat: this former high-end jeweller’s is a palace of white columns with a gorgeous glass-covered courtyard, and the upper floor has been converted into a relaxed cocktail bar. Expect to pay €13–18 for main courses. Daily 12.30–11.30pm, Thurs–Sat drinks until 2am.
El Nacional BCN Pg. de Gràcia, 24 Bis 935 185 053, elnacionalbcn.com; Passseig de Gràcia; map. This massive 2600-square-metre food court offers a one-stop-shop for Spanish cuisine. In its gorgeous, high-ceilinged space you find a fish restaurant, grill, tapas bar, snack bar, oyster bar, wine bar, cocktail bar and most other bars you can think of. Quality across the board is very high; prices aren’t low either, but not bad by Pg. de Gràcia standards. Check it out on the cheap with a quick snack for a few euros or go for broke with a massive €185/kg extra-aged rib-steak cooked on a wood grill. There are no bookings, so be prepared to wait or pick a different section at busy times. Daily noon–1am, Thurs–Sat until 3am.
Tapas24 C/Diputació 269 934 880 977, carlesabellan.com; Passeig de Gràcia; map. Star chef Carles Abellan gets back to his roots at this basement tapas bar. There’s a reassuringly traditional feel that’s echoed in the menu – patatas bravas, Andalucian-style fried fish, meatballs, chorizo sausage and fried eggs. But the kitchen updates the classics too, so there’s also calamares romana (fried squid) dyed black with squid ink or a burger with foie gras. Most tapas cost €4–16. There’s always a rush and a bustle at meal times, so be aware you might have to queue. Mon–Sat 9am–midnight.
Tragaluz Ptge. de la Concepció 5 934 870 621, grupotragaluz.com/; Diagonal; map. This place attracts beautiful people by the score, and the classy Mediterranean-with-knobs-on cooking, served under a glass roof (tragaluz means “skylight”), doesn’t disappoint. Mains include steak tartare, slow-roasted pork with pineapple and pasta with truffles, and cost €15–38. It’s a relaxing stop for those fresh off the modernista trail (La Pedrera is just across the way). Daily 1.30–4pm & 8.30–11.30pm.
ESQUERRA DE L’EIXAMPLE
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Céleri Ptge. del Marimon 5 932 529 594, tribuwoki.com/en/restaurante/celeri/; Hospital Clinic/Diagonal; map. Multi-star-winning chef Xavier Pellicer takes humble vegetables straight from the soil and elevates them to the heights of culinary greatness. The menu is divided by main ingredient – tomato, carrot, etc. – each presented three ways: vegetarian, vegan and with meat or fish. Céleri is by some distance the best Barcelona restaurant for non-omnivores, and one of its finest full-stop. Expect to spend €40–50 for a full meal. Mon–Sat 1–4pm & 8pm–midnight; closed 3 weeks in Aug.
Cerveseria Catalana C/Mallorca 236 932 160 368; Passeig de Gràcia; map. An uptown beer-and-tapas joint where the counters are piled high with elaborately assembled dishes, supplemented by a black-board list of daily specials like bacon, cheese and date skewers and mushroom risotto (most tapas €2–10). It gets busy after work and at meal times, and you might have to wait for a table. Mon–Sat 8am–1am, Sun 9am–1am.
Cinc Sentits C/Aribau 58 933 239 490, cincsentits.com; Universitat; map. Jordi Artal’s “Five Senses” wows diners with his contemporary Catalan cuisine – and it has a Michelin star to boot, so you’ll need to book. Two “tasting menus” (€100 and €120, wine pairings available) plus a lunchtime express menu (€55) use rigorously sourced ingredients – wild fish, mountain lamb, seasonal vegetables, farmhouse cheeses – in elegant, pared-down dishes that are all about flavour. Tues–Sat 1.30–2.30pm & 8.30–9.30pm; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
Coure Ptge. del Marimon 20 932 007 532, restaurantcoure.es; Hospital Clinic/Diagonal; map. Coure’s ground-floor tapas bar is always packed with an afterwork crowd; the main dining room is in the basement, beyond the swaying copper curtains. There’s no view, as you’d imagine, but the outstanding creative Catalan cooking and friendly service ensure the atmosphere is always sunny. The €35 set menu offers best value. Tues–Sat 1–4pm & 8pm–12.30am.
Disfrutar C/Villaroel 163 933 486 896, disfrutarbarcelona.com; Hospital Clinic; map. The hottest restaurant in Barcelona currently belongs to three former head chefs of the now-closed El Bulli, for many years considered the best in the world. The creativity here is off the charts. Tasting menus (starting at €110) are an endless procession of tiny delights that will make you groan with pleasure, at least until the bill arrives. Tues–Sat 1–2.30pm & 8–9.30pm.
Etapes C/Enric Granados 10 933 236 914, www.etapes.cat; Universitat; map. This family-owned restaurant is fuelled by an unusual combination of simplicity and sophistication. The food is refined enough to be called fine dining but steers clear of anything too esoteric. Instead, you’ll get things like scallops and pork belly, and prawn tartare followed by home-cooked cakes from yaya (grandma). The service is simply excellent and the lunch menu (€15.50) is a steal. In the evenings, there are tasting menus at €35 and €60. Mon–Fri 1–3.30pm & 8–11pm, Sat & Sun 8–11pm.
La Falconera C/Enric Granados 58 607 704 923, Diagonal; map. The nose-to-tail stews, tapas and rustic rice dishes of this small restaurant seem out of place in the snazzy Eixample. But don’t be fooled by first impressions: the food packs a serious punch without sacrificing finesse. The €15 set lunch offers excellent value. Don’t miss the Olivier salad, a seductive take on a typically dull tapa. Mon & Tues noon–4pm & 7pm–midnight, Weds–Sat noon–midnight.
La Flauta C/Aribau 23 933 237 038; Universitat; map. One of the city’s best-value lunch menus sees diners queuing for tables early – get there before 2pm to avoid the rush. It’s a handsome bar-restaurant of dark wood and deep colours, and while the name is a nod to the house speciality gourmet sandwiches (a flauta is a thin baguette), there are also meals served tapas-style, day and night (dishes €4–12), based on local market produce, from wild mushrooms to locally landed fish. Mon–Sat 7am–1.15am; closed 3 weeks in Aug.
Gresca C/Provença 230 934 516 193; Diagonal; map. It is a long-running source of bemusement among food writers that Gresca’s Rafa Penya does not have a Michelin star. But what’s bad news for him is good news for diners: you get to keep eating his superb food at prices that are much cheaper than they really ought to be. The €19 lunchtime menú del dia is the best bargain in fine dining that you’ll find in Barcelona but, if funds permit, the €38–70 tasting menus are even more spectacular, and showcase creative, technical cooking of the highest standard. The adjoining Gresca Bar is a touch more informal, and serves superb tapas accompanied by a selection of natural wines. Mon–Fri 1.30–3.30pm (bar until 4pm) & 8.30–10pm (bar until 11.30pm), Sat 8.30–10pm (bar until 11.30pm).
Hisop Ptge. del Marimon 9 932 413 233, hisop.com; Hospital Clinic/Diagonal; map. This tiny alleyway is ruled by the mighty culinary triumvirate of Céleri, Coure and Hisop. The latter, Hisop, is the little restaurant that could: a tiny eatery that has long held a Michelin star despite its unstylish decor, cramped dimensions, and refusal to use unpaid interns. Chef/owner Oriol Ivern somehow keeps prices low too — Hisop’s €63 tasting menu is less than half the price of some of its starred competition. Mon–Fri 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm, Sat 8.30–11.30pm. Closed first week Jan.
Igueldo C/Roselló 186 934 522 555, restauranteigueldo.com; Diagonal; map. Basque co-owners Ana and Gonzalo have imported their regional cuisine, polished by years of practice in some of Spain’s finest restaurants. There’s a focus on excellent ingredients and an effort to keep prices accessible (mains €17–20, set lunch menu €27). Don’t miss the steak tartare with beer yoghurt. Mon–Sat 1.30–4.30pm & 8–11.30pm, Sat & Sun 8–11pm.
Sergi de Meià C/Arribau 106 931 255 710, restaurantsergidemeia.cat Universitat; map. Everything served here is organic, wild-caught or sustainably sourced, but that doesn’t mean that ethics come before enjoyment. Sergi’s cooking is fun and flavoursome, influenced by his mother (who serves hearty breakfasts here) and his time in top fine-dining restaurants. The €22.50 set lunch is a bargain, but book ahead or expect to queue. Tues–Sat 9.30–11.30am (breakfast), 1.30–3.30pm (lunch), 8–10.30pm (dinner).
La Taverna del Clínic C/Rosselló 155 934 104 221, latavernadelclinic.com; Hospital Clinic; map. This sleek taverna, so-called after the hospital over the road, is a gourmet tapas spot that concentrates on rigorously sourced regional produce. Chef Toni Simôes was proclaimed young chef of the year in 2014, when the restaurant was expanded to cope with its burgeoning popularity. Dishes (most cost between €15 and €30) are accompanied by artisan-made olive oil and a high-class wine list, and include crispy suckling pig and sea urchins artfully arranged atop mounds of sea salt. Mon–Sat 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm.
SAGRADA FAMÍLIA AND GLÒRIES
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Bardeni C/Valencia 454 932 314 511, caldeni.com/bardeni; Sagrada Família; map. This “meat bar” specializes in carnivore-centric snacks, such as oxtail cannelloni and hamburgers (all priced around €8) made with specific kinds of beef, such as Nebraska Black Angus and Charolais. Chef/owner Dani Lechuga (whose surname ironically means “lettuce”) is from a family of butchers and meat experts so the (sometimes literally) raw materials here are first-rate. No reservations. Tues–Sat 1.30–3.15pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
Gorria C/Diputació 421 932 451 164, restaurantegorria.com; Monumental; map. This elegant family-owned restaurant serves the finest Basque cuisine, like pochas de Sanguesa (a sort of white-bean stew), wood-grilled lamb, clams in salsa verde or monkfish stuffed with smoked salmon. Prices are on the high side (€50 a head and upwards), but this is regional Spanish cooking of the highest order. Mon 1–3.30pm, Tues–Sat 1–3.30pm & 9–11.30pm; closed Easter week & Aug.
Manairó C/Diputació 424 932 310 057, jordiherrera.es/manairo; Sagrada Família; map. Jordi Herrera doesn’t look like the kind of guy who cooks delicate, Michelin-starred food. But looks are deceiving; the bearded, motorbike-riding former rugby player has carved out a reputation as one of the city’s top chefs by combining technical wizardry with big, bold flavours. The resulting dishes pack a punch – the signature steak, cooked on a patented beartrap-like system of spikes over a stove-top bonfire (€32.50), is one of the best you’ll ever eat. Tasting menu costs €90, set lunch €45. Mon–Sat 1.30–3.30pm & 8.30–10.30pm.
La Paradeta Sagrada Família Ptge. Simó 18 934 500 191, laparadeta.com; Sagrada Família; map. One of a chain of similar Paradetas across the city, “the market stall” looks like its name suggests. Join the queue and you’ll arrive at a display of fish and shellfish on ice, priced by weight. Point out the prawns, cockles, mussels, clams, crabs and lobsters that you want and they’ll be cooked for you there and then. Listen for your number being called, collect the food from the hatch and tuck into some of the best-priced fresh seafood in town. Expect to pay about €20–25 for a slap-up lunch. No reservations. Tues–Thurs 1–4pm & 8–11.30pm, Fri–Sun 1–4pm & 8pm–midnight.
La Taquería Ptge. del Font 5 931 261 359, lataqueria.eu; Sagrada Família; map. When it comes to Mexican food in Europe, throwing the word “authentic” around can get you in trouble with the purists, but in this case, it’s an apt description for this fun little restaurant’s offerings: the tangy tacos al pastor, savoury sopa Azteca and fresh-made guacamole are all hits (€5–10). Tues–Sun 1–4.30pm & 8.30–11.30pm, Fri & Sat until midnight.
GRÀCIA
CAFÉS
Gelateria Caffetteria Italiana Pl. de la Revolució 2 932 102 339; Fontana; map. The place to go for real handmade Italian ice cream, and a stroll around a pretty square in the sun – expect queues at peak times and then more waiting as you struggle to choose from the twenty-odd flavours. Daily 2pm–1am (Fri & Sat until 2am); opens at 4pm Nov–April.
La Nena C/Ramon y Cajal 36 932 851 476, chocolaterialanena.com; Fontana; map. First and foremost, it’s the food at “the little girl” that’s the main attraction – lovely home-made cakes, plus waffles, quiches, organic ice cream, squeezed juices and the like. But parents love it too, as it’s very child friendly, from the changing mats in the loos to the little seats, games and puzzles. Mon 8.30am–2pm & 4–10.30pm, Tues–Fri 8.30am–10.30pm, Sat 9am–10.30pm, Sun 9.30am–10.30pm; closed Aug.
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
L’Arrosseria Xàtiva C/Torrent d’en Vidalet 26 932 848 502, grupxativa.com; Joanic; map. Rice done right is hard to find. The microwaved and burnt offerings that pass for paella in most city restaurants enrage proud Valencians, who hate to see their heritage abused in the name of profit margins. For the real thing, try one of the two Xàtiva restaurants (the other is in Les Corts). There’s also the full range of Catalan rice dishes including creamy arròs melós, all made with fresh stock and organic vegetables. The menú del dia (€15) is a great way to fill up before exploring the area. Mon–Fri 1–4pm & 7.30pm–midnight, Sat & Sun 1pm–midnight.
Cal Boter C/Tordera 62 934 588 462, restaurantcalboter.com; Verdaguer; map. This old-school neighbourhood bistro is perpetually packed with everyone from hipsters to those in need of hip replacements. Survive the queue (or arrive when it opens) and you’ll be rewarded with rib-sticking stews, meatballs, snails and other classic dishes at knockdown prices. The lunch menu is €11.20 and à la carte main courses range from €10 to €18. Decades of customers’ letters on the walls are evidence of Cal Boter’s beloved local status. Tues–Sat 9am–noon, 1–4pm & 9pm–midnight, Mon & Sun 9am–noon & 1–4pm.
Flash, Flash C/Granada del Penedès 25 932 370 990, flashflashbarcelona.com; Diagonal; map. A classic 1970s survivor, Flash, Flash does tortillas (€8–10) served any time you like, any way you like, from plain and simple to elaborately stuffed, with sweet ones for dessert. If that doesn’t grab you, there’s a menu of salads, steaks, burgers and fish. Either way, you’ll love the original white leatherette booths and monotone “models-with-cameras” cutouts – very Austin Powers. Restaurant daily 1pm–1.30am, bar 11am–2am.
Goliard C/Progrés 932 073 175, goliard.cat; Diagonal; map. Smart but casual Goliard offers a pared-down dining experience in a contemporary foodie bistro that looks like it should cost three times as much. Dishes are of-the-moment – octopus and sweet potato in an almond sauce, tuna sashimi on a chive and tomato salsa – and although the menu is divided into starters and mains (most things €7.50–18.50), there are smaller portions available if you want to mix and match. The weekday lunch is a really good deal too (€13.90). Mon–Fri 1–3.30pm & 9–11.30pm, Sat 9–11.30pm; closed 3 weeks in Aug.
Nou Candanchu Pl. Vila de Gràcia 9 932 377 362; Fontana; map. Good for lunch on a sunny day or a leisurely night out on a budget, when you can sit beneath the clocktower in the ever-entertaining local square. There’s a wide menu – tapas and hot sandwiches, but also steak and eggs, steamed clams and mussels, or cod and hake cooked plenty of different ways. It’s managed by an affable bunch of young guys, and there’s lots of choice for €9–15. Mon, Wed & Thurs 9am–1am, Fri–Sun 9am–2am.
La Pepita C/Còrsega 343 932 384 893, lapepitabcn.com; Diagonal/Verdaguer; map. There’s usually a queue out the door, and deservedly so. The tapas, like roasted chicken croquettes with romesco sauce (€4) or aubergine fritters with goat’s cheese, honey and apples (€8), are fantastic, and the atmosphere is chatty and convivial. Hundreds of “love notes” scrawled by customers on the white-tiled walls hint at its popularity. Mon 7pm–midnight, Tues–Sat 1–4.30pm & 7.30pm–midnight; bar until 1.30am.
La Singular C/Francesc Giner 50 932 375 098; Diagonal; map. The tiniest of kitchens turns out refined Mediterranean food – say, Lebanese-style couscous, or sweet potato gnocchi in arrabiata sauce – at moderate prices, with most dishes costing €9–15. There’s always something appealing on the menu for veggies too. It’s a cornerstone of the neighbourhood, with a friendly – even romantic – atmosphere, but there are only nine tables, so go early or reserve. Mon–Fri 1.30–4pm & 8.30pm–midnight (Fri until 1am), Sat 8.30pm–1am; closed 2 weeks in Aug/Sept.
LES CORTS, PEDRALBES AND SARRIÀ-SANT GERVASI
TAPAS BARS AND RESTAURANTS
Bar Tomás C/Major de Sarrià 49, Sarrià 932 031 077; FGC Sarrià; map. The best patatas bravas in the city? Everyone points you here, to this utterly unassuming, white-formica-table bar in the ’burbs (12min by train from Pl. Catalunya FGC station) for a taste of their unrivalled spicy fried potatoes with garlic mayo and salsa picante. Mon–Sat noon–4pm & 6–10pm; closed Aug.
Can Punyetes C/Marià Cubí 189, Sant Gervasi 932 009 159, canpunyetes.com; FGC Muntaner; map. Traditional grillhouse-tavern – well, since 1981 anyway – that offers slick city diners a taste of older times. There are simple salads and tapas, and open grills turning out sausage, lamb chops, chicken and pork, accompanied by grilled country bread, white beans and char-grilled potato halves. Prices are very reasonable (almost everything is under €10) and locals love it. Daily noon–3.45pm & 8pm–midnight.
Casa Fernández C/Santaló 46, Sant Gervasi 932 019 308, casafernandez.com; FGC Muntaner; map. The long kitchen hours are a boon for the bar-crawlers in this neck of the woods. It’s a contemporary place featuring elegant tapas such as tuna tartare as well as market cuisine. Most dishes are in the range €7–16. Mon–Sat 1–5pm & 8pm–midnight, Sun & hols noon–4.30pm.
Fragments Cafè Pl. de la Concórdia 12 934 199 613, fragmentscafe.com; Les Corts; map. A classy yet casual bistro popular with locals for its fresh, classic food (patatas bravas are a speciality) that’s served in the charming dining room or in the shaded garden. The lunch menu is a steal (€14.50), with the rest of the dishes, from tapas to fresh pasta, around €6–15. Tues & Wed 1pm–1am, Thurs 1pm–1.30am, Fri 1pm–2.30am, Sat noon–2.30am, Sun noon–12.30am; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
TIBIDABO
RESTAURANT
El Asador de Aranda Avgda. del Tibidabo 31 934 170 115, asadordearanda.com; FGC Avgda. Tibidabo; map. There are a number of Asadors in town but this is the crown jewel. A multilevel modernista mansion with an opulent interior is the setting for simple but succulent rare-breed lamb (€22.50) roasted in clay ovens. Wash it down with a bottle of good red wine then have a coffee on the rooftop terrace with views over the city. Daily 1–4pm & 8–11pm, closed Sun eve.
< Back to Eating


Drinking and nightlife
Whatever you’re looking for from a night out, you’ll find it somewhere in Barcelona – bohemian boozer, underground club, cocktail bar, summer dance palace, techno temple, Irish pub or designer bar, you name it. Some of the finest places for a drink are cafés and tapas bars, and undoubtedly one of the city’s greatest pleasures is to pull up a pavement seat and watch the world go by. However, the bar scene proper operates at a different pace, and with a different set of rules. Specialist bars in Barcelona include cellers/bodegas (specializing in wine), cerveseries (beer), xampanyeries (champagne and cava) and cocteleries (cocktails). Best known of the city’s nightlife haunts are its hip designer bars, while there’s a stylish club and music scene that goes from strength to strength fuelled by a potent mix of resident and guest DJs, local bands and visiting superstars.
Generally, the bars and clubs in the old town are a mixture of traditional tourist haunts, party-time Irish bars, local drinking places and fashionista hangouts. In the Barri Gòtic, it’s the streets around Plaça Reial and Plaça George Orwell that see most of the action, while in La Ribera, Passeig del Born is the main focus, though a hip scene is developing in the neighbouring barri of Sant Pere too. For a slightly edgier bunch of bars, cross over to El Raval, where the coolest places are found in the upper part of the neighbourhood near MACBA (especially along C/Joaquín Costa). You can still find tradition (and sleaze) further south, closer to the port, in the surviving bars of the old Barri Xinès, while over in the unsung neighbourhood of Poble Sec there’s an increasing number of mellow bars, music venues and late-night haunts and clubs. Port Olímpic is more of a mainstream summer-night playground for locals and tourists alike, with scores of bars, all either themed or otherwise fairly mundane, but with the advantage that you can simply hop from one to another if you don’t like your first choice. Up in Gràcia, there’s a lively bar scene and several offbeat music joints. Meanwhile, the bulk of the big-name warehouse and designer venues are in peripheral areas like Poble Nou and Les Corts, while also high on the list of any seasoned clubber is the tourist fantasy village of Poble Espanyol in Montjuïc.
As for music, major bands include Barcelona on their tours, playing either at sports stadium venues or at the city’s bigger clubs. The city’s pretty hot on jazz, Latin and blues, while folk, roots and world music aficionados need to scour the club gig lists for home-grown and touring talent alike. All sorts of city venues, museums, galleries and institutions have live music programmes too – Caixa Forum is particularly well regarded, while the books-and-music chain FNAC (fnac.es) sponsors gigs and events at the concert halls at its stores at Plaça de Catalunya, L’Illa Diagonal and Glòries.
ESSENTIALS
What’s on Local listings magazines Guía del Ocio (enbarcelona.com) and Time Out Barcelona (timeout.cat) cover current openings, hours and club nights, and most bars, cafés, boutiques and music stores carry flyers and free magazines containing news and reviews. For the Barcelona music scene, check out the websites atiza.com and conciertosbarcelona.es.
Tickets Tickets for major gigs are available from the main ticket agencies; in addition, there’s a concert ticket desk in the Pl. Catalunya FNAC store (Catalunya), while the music shops along C/Tallers (just off the Ramblas; Catalunya) also sell gig tickets.
Opening hours Most bars stay open until 2am, or 3am at weekends, while clubs tend not to open much before midnight, only barely getting started by 3am and staying open until 5am, or even later at weekends. Unlike restaurants, bars and clubs generally stay open throughout August.
Admission charges Some clubs are free before a certain time, usually around midnight. Otherwise, expect to pay €10–20 for club admission, though this usually includes your first drink (if there is free entry, don’t be surprised to find that there’s a minimum drinks charge of anything up to €10). Tickets for gigs run from €20 to €50, depending on the act, though there are cheaper gigs (€5–20) almost every night of the year at a variety of smaller clubs and bars.
THE RAMBLAS
BARS
Boadas Cocktails C/Tallers 1 933 189 592, boadascocktails.com; Catalunya; map. Inside Barcelona’s oldest cocktail bar, tuxedoed bartenders shake, stir and pour classic drinks for a well-dressed crowd against an Art Deco background. It’s a timeless place that’s a perfect start for a sophisticated night on the town. Mon–Thurs noon–2am, Fri & Sat noon–3am; closed 3 weeks in Aug.
Bosc de les Fades Ptge. de la Banca 5 933 172 649, museocerabcn.com; Drassanes; map. Tucked away in an alley off the Ramblas, beside the entrance to the wax museum, the “Forest of the Fairies” is festooned with gnarled plaster tree trunks, hanging branches, fountains and stalactites. It’s a bit cheesy and the service isn’t the best, but tourists love to huddle in the grottoes with a cocktail or two. Mon–Fri 10am–1am, Sat 11am–1.30am, Sun 11am–1am.
La Cazalla Ramblas 25 lacazalla.com; Drassanes; map. A historic remnant of the old days, the hole-in-the-wall Cazalla (under the arch, at the beginning of C/Arc del Teatre) first opened its hatch in 1912. It was closed for some years, but it’s now back in business offering stand-up coffees, beers and shots to an assorted clientele of locals, cops, streetwalkers and the occasional stray tourist. Daily 7pm–2.30am.
BARRI GÒTIC
BARS
L’Ascensor C/Bellafila 3 933 185 347; Jaume I; map. Sliding, antique wooden elevator doors announce the entrance to “The Lift”, but it’s no theme bar – just an easy-going local hangout, great for a late-night drink. Mon–Thurs & Sun 6pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 6pm–3am.
Glaciar Pl. Reial 3 933 021 163, lareial.com; Liceu; map. At this traditional Barcelona meeting point the terrace seating is packed most sunny evenings and at weekends, and the comings and goings in the old town’s liveliest square are half the entertainment. Mon–Fri & Sun 11am–2am, Sat 11am–3am.
Milans Cocktail Bar C/Milans 7 639 426 613; Drassanes; map. Hidden down a bendy alley, this isn’t much more than a hacked-out room in an old Gothic Quarter building, cocktail bar inside, couple of sofas outside, but it works – helped by some wacky art displays, a great soundtrack (Siouxsie to Roxy Music) and one-offs like pop-up vintage clothes sales. Mon–Fri & Sun 6.30pm–2.30am, Sat 6.30pm–3am.
Milk C/Gignàs 21 932 680 922, milkbarcelona.com; Jaume I; map. Irish-owned bar and bistro that’s carved a real niche as a welcoming neighbourhood hangout. Decor, they say, is that of a “millionaire’s drawing room”, with its sofas, cushions and antique chandeliers. Get there early for the famously relaxed “recovery” brunch (10am–4pm), or there’s dinner (6.30–11.30pm) and cocktails every night to a cool soundtrack. Mon–Thurs & Sun 9am–1pm, Fri & Sat 9am–1.30am.
Oviso C/Arai 5, Pl. George Orwell 933 043 726, barnawood.com; Drassanes; map. Holding a mirror onto the neighbourhood, the Oviso fits right in with the scruffy urban square outside – a shabby-chic mural-clad café-bar, popular with a hip young crowd. There’s a sunny terrassa, and the salads and sandwiches are good too, available from breakfast onwards. Mon–Thurs & Sun 9am–2.30am, Fri & Sat 9am–3am.
Schilling C/Ferran 23 933 176 787, cafeschilling.com; Liceu; map. Something of a haven on this heavily touristy drag, Schilling has a certain European “grand-café” style, with its high ceilings, big windows and upmarket feel. It’s a mixed, chilled place to meet up, grab a copa and move on. Mon–Sat 10am–3am, Sun noon–3am.
Zim C/Daguería 20 934 126 548; Jaume I; map. Katherine (of the adjacent Formatgeria La Seu cheese shop) and co-owner Francesc offer up this tiny, hole-in-the-wall tasting bar for selected wines from boutique Spanish producers. For a soothing glass or two accompanied by farmhouse cheese, wonderful cured meats from the Pyrenees and artisan-made bread, you really can’t beat it – and closing time is often somewhat flexible if you’re in the mood for more wine. Tues–Sat 6–11pm; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
Harlem Jazz Club C/Comtessa de Sobradiel 8 933 100 755, harlemjazzclub.es; Jaume I; map. For many years the hot place for jazz, where every style gets an airing, from African and gypsy to flamenco and fusion. There are two shows a night; it’s best to get advance tickets for the second spot. Entry €5–10, depending on the night and the act. No credit cards. Gigs around 10pm & midnight (check website for details); closed Aug.
Jamboree Pl. Reial 17 933 191 789, masimas.com/jamboree; Liceu; map. They don’t get the big jazz names here that they used to, but the nightly gigs (from €10) still pull in the crowds, while the wild Monday night WTF jazz, funk and hip-hop jam session (from 8pm; €5) is a city fixture. Stay on for the club, which kicks in after midnight (entry €10) and you get funky sounds until the small hours. Gigs daily at 8pm & 10pm, club daily midnight–5am.
Karma Pl. Reial 10 933 025 680, karmadisco.com; Liceu; map. A stalwart of the scene, this old-school studenty basement place can get claustrophobic at times. Sounds are indie, Britpop and US college, while a lively crowd gathers at the square-side bar and terrassa which is open from 6pm. Club admission around €10. Tues–Sun midnight–5.30am.
La Macarena C/Nou de Sant Francesc 5 macarenaclub.com; Drassanes; map. Once a place where flamenco tunes were offered up to La Macarena, the Virgin of Seville – now a heaving temple to all things electro. Entry free until around 1am, then from €5. Mon–Thurs & Sun midnight–5am, Fri, Sat & hols midnight–6am.
Sidecar Pl. Reial 7 933 177 666, sidecarfactoryclub.com; Liceu; map. The hippest concert space in the old town – pronounced “See-day-car” – has nightly gigs and DJs that champion rock, indie, roots, electronica and fusion acts. Entry €5–12, though some gigs up to €20. Mon–Sat 7pm–5am, gigs usually at 10.30pm, DJs at 12.30am.
HERE FOR THE BEER?
Until recently, beer (cervesa in Catalan, cerveza in Spanish) in Barcelona meant lager, and only lager, but a growing interest in artisan beers, craft brews and foreign imports means many bars now offer a wider choice. Beer is brewed on the premises in NaparBCN and Garage Beer Co in the Eixample, and in Gràcia at La Cervesera Artesana, Barcelona’s original brew-pub. Another top spot is the absolutely stunning microbrewery Fàbrica Moritz in Raval. For thirty taps of local and international beers plus quality tapas and burgers, try BIERcaB. There are also a few pioneering bars serving a decent handcrafted beer – standouts are the Asian tapas joint Mosquito and Ale&Hop in Sant Pere, and Poble Sec’s beer-and-music bar Cervecería Jazz. The city is also home to some excellent artisan beer festivals, including the Barcelona Beer Festival (barcelonabeerfestival.com), held over three days each March (the venue varies from year to year), which has proved wildly popular and now attracts thousands of visitors and brewers, and La Fira del Poblenou (lafiradelpoblenou.com) in July.
EL RAVAL
BARS
Almirall C/Joaquín Costa 33 933 189 917; Universitat; map. Dating from 1860, Barcelona’s oldest bar is a modernista design classic – check out the doors, counter and stupendous glittering bar. Not too young, not too loud, and always good for a late-night drink. Mon–Wed 4.30pm–2am, Thurs–Sun noon–2.30am.
Betty Ford’s C/Joaquín Costa 56 933 041 368; Universitat; map. With a vibe somewhere between a student lounge and a beach bar, Betty’s is a bouncy place full of youngsters sipping colourful cocktails and cold Australian beer. Deal with the late-night munchies by getting to grips with their famed burger menu. Mon & Sun 7pm–2.30am, Tues–Sat 1pm–2.30am.
La Confitería C/Sant Pau 128 934 430 458; Paral.lel; map. This one-time bakery and confectioner’s – featuring a carved wood bar, faded tile floor, murals, antique chandeliers and mirrored cabinets – is now a popular bar and meeting point. It’s a handy stop-off on the way to a night out in Poble Sec. Mon–Thurs 7pm–3am, Fri 6pm–3.30am, Sat 5pm–3.30am, Sun 5pm–3am.
Fàbrica Moritz Ronda de Sant Antoni 41 934 260 050, moritz.com; Sant Antoni/Universitat; map. Cultural centre, cervesería, museum and more all come together in French architect Jean Nouvel’s gorgeous revamp of the Catalan brewer’s nineteenth-century factory. An on-site microbrewery supplies the beer, while star chef Jordi Vilà directs the various gastronomic spaces here. Daily 7.30am–3am.
Marmalade C/Riera Alta 4–6 934 423 966, marmaladebarcelona.com; Sant Antoni; map. A hugely glam face-lift for the old Muebles Navarro furniture store has gone for big, church-like spaces and a backlit Art Deco bar that resembles a high altar. Cocktails, bistro meals and gourmet burgers pull in a relaxed dine-and-lounge crowd, and there’s a popular weekend brunch too. If you like the style, give the more informal Barri Gòtic sister bar, Milk, a whirl as well. Mon–Thurs 6.30pm–1am, Fri & Sat 10am–1am, Sun 10am–1am (kitchen open until midnight daily).
Marsella C/Sant Pau 65 934 427 263; Liceu; map. Authentic, atmospheric 1930s bar – named after the French port of Marseilles – where absinthe is the drink of choice. It featured in Woody Allen’s Vicky Cristina Barcelona, so expect a spirited mix of film fans, oddball locals and young dudes, all looking for a slice of the old Barri Xinès. Mon–Thurs 10pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 10pm–3am; closed 2 weeks in Aug.
Pesca Salada C/Cera 32 686 265 309; Sant Antoni; map. This former fish market turned gin haven turns up the charm with a cleverly executed (and just subtle enough) under-the-sea theme. It’s an intimate corner spot with good music, lovingly crafted cocktails and nibbles like montaditos (helpful for maintaining one’s sea legs as the night goes on). Tues–Sat 8.30pm–3am.
Resolis C/Riera Baixa 22 934 412 948; Sant Antoni; map. A decaying, century-old bar turned into a cool hangout with decent tapas. The owners didn’t do much – a lick of paint, polish the panelling, patch up the brickwork – but now punters spill out of the door onto “secondhand clothes street” and a good time is had by all. Mon–Thurs & Sun 7pm–2am, Fri & Sat 7pm–2.30am.
Zelig C/Carme 116 934 415 622, zelig-barcelona.com; Sant Antoni; map. The photo-frieze on granite walls and a fully stocked cocktail bar make it very much of its barri but Zelig stands out from the crowd – two Dutch owners offer a chatty welcome, a tendency towards 1980s sounds and a love of all things camp. Mon–Thurs & Sun 11am–2am, Fri & Sat 11am–3am.
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
23 Robadors C/Robador 23 23robadors.wordpress.com; Liceu; map. The tapas are lukewarm but the live jazz, blues and flamenco performances in this underground bar are red hot. Listen free from the bar or pay €4 to sit near the stage. It gets packed quickly, so arrive early or sharpen your elbows. Daily 8pm–3am.
La Concha C/Guàrdia 14 933 024 118, laconchadelraval.com; Drassanes; map. The Arab–flamenco fusion throws up a great atmosphere, worth braving the slightly dodgy area for. It’s a kitsch, gay-friendly joint, dedicated to the “incandescent presence” of Sara Montiel, Queen of Song and Cinema (and icon of the Spanish gay community), with uninhibited dancing by tourists and locals alike. Admission free. Mon–Thurs & Sun 5pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 5pm–3.30am.
Jazz Sí Club C/Requesens 2 933 295 667, tallerdemusics.com; Sant Antoni; map. This is a great place for inexpensive (€5–8) gigs in a tiny sweatbox of a club associated with the Taller de Músics (Music School). Every night from around 8.30 or 9pm there’s something different, from exuberant rock, blues, jazz and jam sessions to the popular weekly Cuban (Thurs) and flamenco (Fri) nights. There are usually a couple of sessions a night, with an interval in between. Your first drink is included in the price, and the bar is as cheap as chips. Daily 8–11.30pm.
Moog C/l’Arc del Teatre 3 933 191 789, masimas.com/moog; Drassanes; map. One of the most influential clubs around for electronic sounds, playing techno, electro, drum’n’ bass and trance to a cool but up-for-it crowd. The bigger-name international DJs tend to play Wednesday nights. Admission €5–10. Daily midnight–5am.
SANT PERE AND LA RIBERA
BARS
Ale&Hop C/Basses de Sant Pere 10, Sant Pere 9331 269 094, facebook.com/aleandhop; Urquinaona; map. Consider yourself a beer geek? Then Ale&Hop (pronounced “Al-eh-UP”) is your kind of bar. Ten rotating taps pour artisanal beers in all styles (porters, stouts, lagers, gluten free) with names like “Dark Alliance” and “Sex-A-Pils”. There’s also a large selection of bottled beer, a crowd-pleasing vegetarian bar menu and a Sunday brunch (11am to 5pm). Mon–Wed 5pm–1.30am, Thurs 5pm–2.30am, Fri 5pm–3am, Sat 1pm–3am, Sun 11am–2am.
Black Horse C/Allada Vermell 16, Sant Pere 933 152 053, bit.ly/Facebook_BlackHorseBCN; Jaume I; map. Barcelona has embraced the “English” pub and “Irish” bar with a vengeance, and every barri has a place where the stag and hen groups can feel right at home. On the whole, there’s little to choose between them, though by common consent, the Black Horse is among the best, with an off-the-beaten-track feel, despite being just a few minutes from the Picasso museum. Mon–Fri 6pm–2am, Sat & Sun 1pm–2am.
Casa Paco C/Allada Vermell 10, Sant Pere 935 073 719; Jaume I; map. Sant Pere’s signature bar is this cool music joint that’s a hit on the weekend DJ scene – the tagline “not a disco, just a bar with good music” says it all. There’s a great terrassa under the trees, and if you can’t get a table here try one of several other alfresco bars down the traffic-free boulevard. Meanwhile, the associated Pizza Paco across the way (also with its own terrace) means you don’t have to go anywhere else for dinner. Mon–Thurs & Sun 9.30am–1am, Fri & Sat 9.30am–3am.
La Fianna C/Manresa 4, La Ribera 933 151 810, lafianna.com; Jaume I; map. Flickering candelabras, parchment lampshades, rough plaster walls and deep colours set the Gothic mood in this stylish lounge-bar that’s “putting the beat in the Born”. Relax on the chill-out beds and velvet sofas, or book ahead to eat – the fusion-food restaurant is open from 8.30pm. Mon–Wed & Sun 6pm–2am, Thurs–Sat 6pm–3am.
Mudanzas C/Vidrería 15, La Ribera 933 191 137; Barceloneta; map. Locals like the relaxed feel (especially if you can hide yourself away in the cosy upper room) at Mudanzas, while those in the know come for the wide selection of rums, whiskies and vodkas from around the world. Mon–Thurs 10am–2am, Fri & Sat 10am–3am, Sun 5pm–2am.
La Vinya del Senyor Pl. de Santa María 5, La Ribera 933 103 379; Jaume I; map. A great wine bar with front-row seats onto the lovely church of Santa María del Mar. The wine list is really good – with a score available by the glass – and there are oysters, smoked salmon and other classy tapas available. Mon–Thurs noon–1am, Fri & Sat noon–2am, Sun noon–midnight.

CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT CAFÉ DEL SOL; SALA RAZZMATAZZ; SONÁR

PORT VELL AND BARCELONETA
BARS
Can Paixano (La Xampanyeria) C/Reina Cristina 7, Port Vell 933 100 839, canpaixano.com; Barceloneta; map. A must on everyone’s itinerary is this backstreet joint with attached shop where the drink of choice – all right, the only drink – is cava (Catalan champagne). Don’t go thinking sophistication – it might come in traditional champagne saucers (the sort of thing Dean Martin used to stack in a pyramid and then pour wine over), but this is a counter-only joint where there’s fizz, tapas and tapas-in-sandwiches and that’s your lot. And who could want more? Mon–Sat 9am–10.30pm; closed 3 weeks in Aug.
Makamaka Beach Burger Cafe Pg. de Joan de Borbó 76, Barceloneta 932 213 520, makamaka.es; Barceloneta; map. You really can’t ask for more: creative cocktails and some of the city’s finest burgers served on a large terrassa steps from the beach. It’s Hawaii-meets-Barcelona – laidback, late night and lots of fun. Mon–Thurs & Sun 11am–2am, Fri & Sat 11am–3am.
PORT OLÍMPIC AND POBLE NOU
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
CDLC Pg. Marítim 32, Port Olímpic 932 240 470, cdlcbarcelona.com; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. With a clientele of A-list celebs, football players, well-heeled tourists and local rich kids, this beautiful-person lounge-club hangout is for those who want to dine, dance and kick back in like-minded company. Daily: restaurant from noon, club midnight–5am.
Club Catwalk C/Ramon Trias Fargas 2–4, Port Olímpic 932 240 740, clubcatwalk.net; Ciutadella-Vila Olímpica; map. The sleek, chic portside club of choice for the beautiful of Barcelona, playing house, funk, soul and r’n’b to well-heeled locals and visitors. It’s under the landmark Hotel Arts Barcelona. Admission €12–15. Daily 11pm–6am.
Sala Razzmatazz C/Pamplona 88, Poble Nou 933 208 200, salarazzmatazz.com; Bogatell; map. Razzmatazz hosts the biggest in-town rock gigs (the concert hall capacity is 3000), while at weekends the former warehouse turns into “five clubs in one”, spinning indie, rock, pop, techno, electro, retro and more in variously named music bars like “The Loft”, “Pop Bar” or “Lolita”. Admission (€6–16 advance, €10–17 box office) gets you entrance to all the bars. Daily 1–6am.
Sala Rocksound C/Almogàvers 116, Poble Nou salarocksound.com; Bogatell; map. As you might have guessed from its name, Rocksound usually hosts local bands from the heavier side of the musical tracks. It’s also the preferred Barcelona venue for a host of touring blues and Americana musicians who love its intimate atmosphere, good sound and cheap drinks. Admission to most gigs is €12–15, with discounts when bought in advance. Daily 9pm–late.
MONTJUÏC
BAR
La Caseta del Migdia Mirador del Migdia lacaseta.org; cable car (Telefèric de Montjuïc) or bus #150 to Castell de Montjuïc, then follow signs to “Mirador” (15min walk); map. It’s cooler in every sense up on the heights of Montjuïc, as a welcome summer breeze and chill-out sounds entice visitors to the panoramic, open-air bar of La Caseta, around the back of the castle. Usually weekends noon–sunset, plus summer weekend DJ nights.
CLUB
La Terrrazza Poble Espanyol, Avgda. Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 687 969 825, laterrrazza.com; Espanya; map. Open-air summer club that’s the place to be in Barcelona. Nonstop dance, house and techno, though don’t get there until at least 3am, and be prepared for the style police. May–Oct Thurs–Sat 12.30–6am.
POBLE SEC
BARS
Celler Cal Marino C/Margarit 54 933 294 592, calmarino.com; Poble Sec; map. The wines in the barrels are to take away at knockdown prices, and you can drink a copa for under two euros, but there’s also a more sophisticated wine selection available in this cavernous, stone-walled tavern. Add cheap tapas and a jolly neighbourhood crowd, and there are more than enough reasons to stop by. Tues–Sat noon–3pm & 7.30–11.30pm, Sun noon–3pm.
Cervecería Jazz C/Margarit 43 934 433 259, cerveceriajazz.com; Poble Sec; map. Grab a stool at the carved bar and shoot the breeze over a Catalan craft beer. It’s an amiable joint with great music, jazz to reggae, and locals swear that the burgers are the best in town. Tues–Sat 7pm–3am.
La Tieta C/Blai 1 600 742 532; Paral.lel; map. Small but perfectly formed, “The Aunt” is a cool drinks and tapas place, with selected wines served by the glass, an open window onto the street and just enough room inside for a dozen or so good friends. Mon–Fri 6pm–midnight, Sat noon–midnight, Sun noon–5pm.
Xixbar C/Rocafort 19 934 234 314, xixbar.com; Poble Sec; map. “Chicks” is an old granja (milk bar) – which explains the milk pail and big cow photos – turned candlelit, but completely unstuffy, cocktail bar. Gin’s the big drink here (they claim over one hundred varieties), and they mix stonking gin cocktails and even have their own specialist gin shop on site, with tasting courses and other activities. Mon 6.30pm–2.30am, Tues–Wed 6pm–2.30pm, Thurs 5pm–2.30pm, Fri & Sat 5pm–3am.
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
Maumau C/Fontrodona 33 934 418 015, maumaunderground.com; Paral.lel; map. If you’re really in the know, then Maumau is one of your first weekend ports of call – a great underground lounge-club, cultural centre and chill-out space with comfy sofas, nightly film and video projections, exhibitions and a roster of guest DJs playing deep, soulful grooves. Strictly speaking it’s a private club, but they tend to let foreign visitors in for free – if you do join, the “Carnet Maumau” (Maumau Card, currently €12) gives you all sorts of discounts and deals at hot venues right across the city. Thurs–Sat 9pm–2.45am.
Sala Apolo C/Nou de la Rambla 113 934 414 001, sala-apolo.com; Paral.lel; map. Old-time ballroom turned hip concert venue with gigs on two stages (local acts to big names) and an eclectic series of club nights with names to reckon with (Nasty Mondays, Crappy Tuesdays etc). Sounds range far and wide, from punk or Catalan rumba to the weekend’s long-running techno/electro Nitsa Club (nitsa.com). “CupCake Night” on Thursdays is highly camp, with an Abba- and Village People-heavy playlist. Gigs €10–35, club nights €11–16. Daily midnight–5am.
Tinta Roja C/Creu dels Molers 17 934 433 243, www.tintaroja.cat; Poble Sec; map. More of an experience than most bars, this highly theatrical tango bar features a succession of over-the-top crimson rooms leading to a stage at the back. There’s cabaret and live music (folk, rock, world music) – often free – a couple of nights a week, though special shows are €5–8. Wed 8.30pm–1am, Thurs 8.30pm–2am, Fri & Sat 8.30pm–3am.
DRETA DE L’EIXAMPLE
CLUB AND LIVE MUSIC
City Hall Rambla de Catalunya 2–4 932 380 722, cityhallbarcelona.com; Catalunya; map. Very popular mainstream dance joint – the handy location helps – which hosts some of the most varied club nights around, from 1980s revival to electro. Admission €10, though often free before 2am. Daily midnight–6am.
ESQUERRA DE L’EIXAMPLE
BARS
Belchica C/Villaroel 60 625 814 001; Urgell; map. Barcelona’s first Belgian beer bar guarantees a range of decent brews (including hard-to-find Trappist ales). It’s also a muso’s joint, playing electronica, new jazz, lounge, reggae and other left-field sounds, and there are live acts once or twice a week. Tues–Thurs & Sun 6pm–2am, Fri & Sat 6pm–3am.
BIERCaB C/Muntaner 55 644 689 045, biercab.com; Universitat; map. Thirty international craft beers on tap, updated constantly, means that there’s an ale to slake all thirsts here. The staff are all enthusiastic and well informed, and happy to let you try before you buy. Soak it all up with some of the hearty Wagyu beef burgers or tapas and pick up a bottle of your favourite to take home from the adjoining shop. Mon–Thurs noon–midnight, Fri & Sat noon–2am, Sun 5pm–midnight.
Dry Martini C/Aribau 162–166 932 175 072, drymartiniorg.com; Provença; map. White-jacketed bartenders, dark wood and brass fittings, a self-satisfied air – it could only be the city’s legendary uptown cocktail bar, regularly ranked among the best in the world. To be fair, though, no one mixes drinks better and the regulars aren’t the one-dimensional business types you might expect. There’s also a mysterious hideaway back-room restaurant, Speakeasy, where you can play at being Al Capone. Mon–Thurs 1pm–2.30am, Fri 1pm–3am, Sat 6.30pm–3am, Sun 6.30pm–2.30am.
Garage Beer Co. C/Consell de Cent 261 935 285
989 www.garagebeer.co; Universitat; map. This friendly brewpub was an early fixture on Barcelona’s “beer mile” – the craft beer bar-filled area that’s boomed in recent years. There are no frills, just great ales, simple snacks, wooden benches and a glass wall onto the microbrewery out back. Mon–Thurs & Sun 5pm–midnight, Fri & Sat 5pm–2.30am.
NaparBCN Co. C/Diputació 223 934 089 162 naparbcn.com; Universitat; map. The beer brewed at this bar-restaurant is considered by many local enthusiasts to be the best in the city. Forget the minimalist spit-and-sawdust image of craft beer; this is a spacious, elegant space with quality tapas to match the 24 beers on tap. The bottle list includes some seriously expensive rarities. Tues & Wed 5pm–midnight, Thurs–Sat 5pm–2am.
Velódromo C/Muntaner 213 934 306 022; Hospital Clinic; map.This Art Deco gem, with a lofty, Parisien feel, a swooping staircase and a gleaming bar, is ideal for swish drinks and cocktails. The addition of star chef Carles Abellan to the management team has resulted in an almost round-the-clock menu of excellent tapas and bistro dishes, making it a favourite of early risers – and late-to-bedders – in search of quality snacks. Mon–Fri 7am–3am, Sat & Sun 6am–3am.
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
Antilla BCN Latin Club C/Aragó 141 934 514 564, antillasalsa.com; Hospital CliniC/Urgell; map. Latin and Caribbean tunes galore – rumba, son, salsa, merengue, mambo, you name it – for out-and-out good-time dancing. There are live bands, killer cocktails and dance classes most nights. Wed 10pm–2am, Thurs & Fri 11pm–5am, Sat 11pm–6am, Sun 7pm–1am.
Honky Tonk Blues Bar C/Finlàndia 45, Sants 934 229 598; Plaça de Sants; map. If your dog done died and your lover did you wrong, pull up a stool in the city’s most authentic barrelhouse blues bar. There’s free live music most weekend evenings and always plenty of bourbons to choose from. Wed & Thurs 7pm–2am, Sat & Sun 7pm–3am.
Luz de Gas C/Muntaner 246 932 097 711, luzdegas.com; Diagonal; map. Former ballroom venue popular with a slightly older crowd, with live music (rock, blues, soul, jazz and covers) every night around midnight. Foreign acts appear regularly, too, mainly jazz-blues types but also old soul acts and up-and-coming rockers. Admission up to €20. Daily 11.30pm–5am, also occasional gigs from 9.30pm.
Quilombo C/Aribau 149 934 395 406, quilombopub.com; Diagonal; map. Unpretentious music bar – just a bare box of a room really – that’s rolled with the years since 1971, featuring live guitarists, Latin American bands and a clientele that joins in enthusiastically, maracas in hand. Mon–Thurs & Sun 9pm–3am, Fri & Sat 7.30pm–3.30am.
SAGRADA FAMÍLIA & GLORÌES
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
JazzMan C/Roger de Flor 238 667 618 593, jazzmanbcn.com; Verdaguer; map. Everything you’d want from a cosy jazz club: low lights, free live music, good drinks and an intimate vibe. When there’s no-one on stage, expect to hear classics from JazzMan’s impeccable vinyl and CD collection. Mon–Thurs 9pm–2.30am, Fri 8pm–3am, Sat 10pm–3pm.
Pipa Club C/Santa Eulàlia 21 933 011 165, bpipaclub.wixsite.com/bpipaclub3; Verdaguer; map. Barcelona’s pipe-smokers’ club abandoned its clandestine-but-known-to-everyone home in Plaça Reial in 2015. Its new, wood-panelled home is less crowded but even more classy; there is, as you’d expect, a pipe-smoking room, but also cultural events and live jazz, blues, soul, swing and world music sessions around the Sherlock Holmes bar. Admission €3. Thurs 9.30pm–2am, Fri–Sun 10pm–3am.
GRÀCIA
BARS
Bobby Gin C/Francisco Giner 47 933 681 892, bobbygin.com; Diagonal; map. The sign near the bar says “El gintonic perfecto no existe” (the perfect gin and tonic does not exist). Perhaps. But the sizeable G&Ts (from €8) here come very, very close. Mon–Wed & Sun 4pm–2am, Thurs–Sat 4pm–3am.
Café del Sol Pl. del Sol 16 934 155 663; Fontana; map. The grandaddy of the Pl. del Sol scene sees action day and night. On summer evenings, when the square is packed, there’s not an outdoor table to be had, but even in winter this is a popular drinking den – the pub-like interior has a backroom and gallery, often rammed to the rafters. Tues–Thurs 1pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 1pm–3am (kitchen closes at midnight).
Canigó Pl. de la Revolució 10 932 133 049, barcanigo.com; Fontana; map. Family-run neighbourhood bar now entering its third generation. It’s not much to look at, but the drinks are cheap and it’s a real Gràcia institution, packed out at weekends with a young, hip and largely local crowd. Mon–Thurs 10am–2am, Fri 10am–3am, Sat 8pm–3am.
La Cervesera Artesana C/Sant Agustí 14 932 379 594, lacervesera.net; Diagonal; map. A score of identikit Irish pubs in town serve Guinness and other imported beers, but for real ale, Catalan style – including an own-brew stout – the city’s original microbrewery is well worth a visit. Mon–Thurs & Sun 6pm–2am, Fri & Sat 6pm–3am.
Elephanta C/Torrent d’En Vidalet 37 932 376 906, elephanta.cat; Joanic; map. This relaxed hideout with flea-market chairs and menus made from old album covers serves crisp mixed drinks (gin is the main attraction) in a chilled-out space that feels just like home. Mon–Wed 6pm–1.30am, Thurs 6pm–2.30am, Fri & Sat 6pm–3am, Sun 5–10pm.
Vinilo C/Matilde 2  669 177 945; Diagonal; map. A 1912 gramophone greets you at the entrance of this dimly lit music bar, but the playlist – all on vinyl as the name suggests – is a little more contemporary. Expect to hear anything from Massive Attack to Edith Piaf as you rub shoulders with local musicians, touring indie stars and hipsters. Mon–Wed 6pm–1.30am, Thurs 6pm–2.30am, Fri 9pm–3am, Sat 10pm–3am.
Virreina Pl. de la Virreina 1 932 379 880, virreinabar.com; Fontana; map. Another real Gràcia favourite, on one of the neighbourhood’s prettiest squares, with a very popular summer terrassa. It’s one of those places where you drop by for a quick drink and find yourself staying for hours. Mon–Fri 9am–1am, Sat 10am–2am, Sun 10am–midnight.
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
Centre Artesà Tradicionàrius (CAT) Trav. de Sant Antoni 6–8 932 184 485, tradicionarius.cat; Fontana; map. The best place in town for folk, traditional and world music by Catalan, Spanish and visiting performers, including some occasional big names. Admission is usually around €15 and you can expect anything from Basque bagpipes to Brazilian singers. There are also music and instrument workshops, while CAT sponsors all sorts of outreach concerts and festivals, including an annual international folk and traditional dance festival (Jan–April). Concerts usually at 9.30 or 10pm.
El Col•lectionista Torrent de les Flors 46 932 191 380, Joanic; map. “The collector” offers 60s, 70s, 80s and 90s pop-and-rock nostalgia, in a cosy Gràcia setting. The live music is varied and there’s room to dance if you get into the groove. Thurs–Sun 9pm–3am.
Heliogàbal C/Ramon y Cajal 80 heliogabal.com; Joanic; map. Not much more than a boiler room given a lick of paint, but filled with a cool, twenty-something crowd here for the live poetry and music. Recent licensing issues have meant that they have only been able to host small, acoustic sessions, usually in the afternoons or early evening, but these are always special, intimate events. Admission is usually €3–10, depending on the act, and drinks aren’t expensive. Opening hours vary, and you’ll need to swing by to find out what’s on.
Otto Zutz C/Lincoln 15 932 380 722, ottozutz.com; FGC Gràcia; map. It first opened as a club in 1985 and has since lost some of its glam cachet, but this three-storey former textile factory still has a shed-load of pretensions. The sounds are basically hip-hop, r’n’b and house, and with the right clothes and face, you’re in. Admission €18. Wed–Sun 11.45pm–6am.
LES CORTS, PEDRALBES AND SARRIÀ-SANT GERVASI
BARS
Gimlet C/Santaló 46, Sant Gervasi 932 015 306, drymartiniorg.com; FGC Muntaner; map. This favoured cocktail joint is especially popular in summertime, when the street-side tables offer a great vantage point for watching the party unfold. There are also two or three other late-opening bars on the same stretch. Mon–Wed 6pm–1am, Thurs 6pm–2.30pm, Fri & Sat 6pm–3am.
CLUBS AND LIVE MUSIC
Bikini Avgda. Diagonal 547, Les Corts 933 220 800, bikinibcn.com; Les Corts/María Cristina; map. This traditional landmark of Barcelona nightlife (behind L’Illa shopping centre) offers a regular diet of great indie, rock, roots and world gigs, followed by club sounds from house to Brazilian, according to the night. Admission €15, though some big-name gigs cost up to €40. Thurs midnight–5am, Fri & Sat midnight–6am, Sun 7pm–midnight.
La Garrafa dels Beatles C/Joan Güell 150, Les Corts 934 910 447, thebeatles-pub.com; Plaça del Centre; map. Get back to the classics of 60s rock at Barcelona’s only Beatles-themed pub. Locals and day-trippers come together to twist and shout along to the Fab Four’s greatest hits, played live from 12.30pm onwards by co-owners Joan and Ricky. Check the website for other live shows here, which run (almost) eight days a week. Mon–Sat 7pm–3am.
TIBIDABO
BAR
Mirablau Pl. del Dr Andreu, Avgda. Tibidabo 934 340 035, mirablaubcn.com; FGC Avgda. del Tibidabo then Tramvia Blau, or taxi; map. This chic bar by the tram and funicular terminus has unbelievable city views. By day it’s a great place for drinks, while at night it’s more of an upmarket tapas and music joint. Mon–Wed 11am–3.30am, Thurs 11am–4.30am, Fri & Sat 10am–5am, Sun 10am–2.30pm.
THE GIN AND TONIC CRAZE
In Barcelona, they don’t let anything come between their gin and their tonic – not even the word “and”. The gintonic, as it’s known, has always been a favourite drink, but in recent years there’s been a surge in bars specializing in the classic cocktail and its star ingredient, ginebra. Bobby Gin in Gràcia has some sixty varieties, Pesca Salada in El Raval stocks 54 kinds and Xixbar, which claims to be the first Barcelona bar specializing in gin, mixes it up with more than a hundred types. And the tonic component has not been forgotten, with bars pouring a dizzying array of premium varieties, from the regionally produced Tònica Catalana to those from Argentina, the UK and beyond. It’s a refreshing trend worthy of glass-clinking ¡salut!
< Back to Drinking and nightlife


Shopping
CRAFT WORKSHOPS
Crafts have always been central to Barcelona’s industry, with a history dating back to the Middle Ages. Many of the street names in the Born (Jaume I/Barceloneta), particularly, refer to the crafts once practised there; eg C/Argentería, silversmith’s street, C/Mirallers, the street where they used to make mirrors, C/Vidriería, glassmakers’ street, or C/Sombrerers, where hats (sombreros) were made. Over the last couple of decades, neighbourhoods like the Born, El Raval and Poble Nou have once again become craft centres as empty buildings and warehouses have been opened up as workshops. Some artists work behind closed doors, while others have a space at the front where they sell their limited series or unique pieces.
A good way to see the Ciutat Vella (old town) workshops is to coincide with the Tallers Oberts, or open workshops (tallersobertsbarcelona.cat), usually held over the last two weekends of May, when there are studio visits, exhibitions, children’s workshops, guided tours and lots of other events. 
ESSENTIALS
Opening hours Shop opening hours are typically Mon–Sat 10am–1.30/2pm & 4.30–7.30/8pm, though all the bigger shops stay open over lunchtime, while smaller shops close on Saturday afternoons and/or may vary their hours in other ways. Major department stores and shopping malls open Mon–Sat 10am–10pm, though the cafés, restaurants and leisure outlets in malls are usually open on Sunday too. Barcelona’s daily food markets, all in covered halls, are generally open Mon–Sat 8am–3pm & 5–8pm (local variations apply), though the most famous, La Boqueria on the Ramblas, opens throughout the day. Most fish stalls, however, are closed on Mondays.
Sales The annual sales (rebaixes, rebajas) follow the main fashion seasons – mid-January until the end of February, and throughout July and August.
Tax refunds Non-EU residents can get an IVA (ie VAT) refund on each purchase over the value of €90.16; if there’s a “Tax-Free Shopping” sticker displayed at the store (premiertaxfree.com), ask for the voucher and claim the refund at the airport before leaving.
ANTIQUES
Mercantic C/Rius i Taulet 120, Sant Cugat del Vallès 936 744 950, mercantic.com; FGC Volpalleres (15min on line S2 from Plaça Catalunya in central Barcelona, then a 5min walk). This permanent antiques and collectables market is out in the suburbs but makes a great trip for casual browsers and serious collectors alike. You’ll find everything from furniture to farm machinery, old radios to vintage jewellery, postcards to erotic drawings, plus an outdoor flea market (Sun until 3pm), weekly lot auctions (Sat) and trade markets (1st Sun of each month). Tues–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun 10am–3pm; closed three weeks in Aug.
ARTS, CRAFTS AND GIFTS
Artesanía Catalunya C/Banys Nous 11, Barri Gòtic 934 674 660, artesania-catalunya.com; Liceu; map. It’s always worth a look in the “Emprentes de Catalunya” showroom of the local government’s arts and crafts promotion board. Exhibitions change, but most of the work is contemporary in style, from basketwork to glassware, though traditional methods are still very much encouraged. They also have an online shop: bcncrafts.com. Mon–Sat 10am–8pm, Sun 10am–2pm.
Cerería Subirà Bxda. de la Llibreteria 7, Barri Gòtic 933 152 606, facebook.com/cereriasubira; Jaume I; map. Barcelona’s oldest shop (it’s been here since 1760) has a beautiful interior, and sells unique handcrafted candles. Mon–Thurs 9.30am–1.30pm & 4–8pm, Fri 9.30am–8pm, Sat 10am–8pm.
Fantastik C/Joaquín Costa 62, El Raval 933 013 068, fantastik.es; Universitat; map. Beguiling gifts, crafts and covetable objects from four continents. You’ll never know how you lived without them, whether it’s Chinese robots, African baskets, Russian domino sets or Vietnamese kitchen scales. Mon–Fri 11am–2pm & 4–8.30pm, Sat 11am–3pm & 4–9pm.
Oslo C/Torrent de l’Olla 164, Gràcia 931 056 437, oslobarcelona.com; Fontana; map. A big floral “O” marks the spot for this artists’ co-operative in Gràcia. Inside, you’ll find paintings, photographs, illustrations, ceramics, leather bags, T-shirts and more, all created by its talented members. For something original and uniquely “Barcelonin”, it’s a perfect place to shop. Tues–Sat 11am–2pm & 5–8.30pm.
Papirum Bxda. de la Llibreteria 2, Barri Gòtic 933 105 242, papirumbcn.com; Jaume I; map. For all your writing needs – hand-painted paper, draughtsman’s pens, leather-bound notebooks, calligraphy sets and more. Mon–Fri 10am–8.30pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8.30pm.
Taller Textil Teranyina C/Notariat 10, El Raval 933 179 436, teresarosa.com; Catalunya; map. Teresa Rosa Aguayo opened her Raval textile workshop in 1987, and continues to weave striking contemporary carpets, rugs and wall-hangings, and make textile jewellery and other objects. You can call in any time to see the design work being carried out, or sign up for one of the courses. Mon–Fri 11am–2pm & 5–8pm.
Vuela Sola C/Blanqueria 13, La Ribera 655 584 012, vuelasola.com; Jaume I; map. A shop-cum-workshop tucked away on one of La Ribera’s quietest streets, this is a great place for an unusual gift, with stylish bowls and serving dishes, mugs, mobiles and hand-painted ceramic fish in cream and pastel shades. You can see the artists at work and join in one of their regular ceramic workshops if you’d like to have a go yourself. Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4.30–8.30pm.
BOOKS
ART, DESIGN AND PHOTOGRAPHY
Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya Palau Nacional, Montjuïc 936 220 360, mnac.cat; Espanya; map. The MNAC bookshop has the city’s widest selection of books on Catalan art, architecture, design and style. Tues–Sat 10.15am–5.45pm (May–Sept until 7.45pm), Sun 10.15am–2.45pm.
Mutt C/Comerç 15, Sant Pere 931 924 443; Jaume I; map. This bookshop and contemporary art gallery has become a hip meeting point for Barcelona’s creative set. No wonder – it’s a gorgeous space filled with an eclectic array of titles and artwork. Mon–Sat 11am–2pm.
COMICS AND GRAPHIC BOOKS
Norma Comics Pg. de Sant Joan 9, Sagrada Família/Glòries 932 448 423, normacomics.com; Arc de Triomf; map. Spain’s best comic and graphic-novel shop, for everything from manga to the Caped Crusader, plus DVDs and all kinds of related gear and gizmos. Mon–Sat 10.30am–8.30pm.
TRAVEL, GUIDES AND MAPS
Llibreria Quera C/Petritxol 2, Barri Gòtic 933 180 743, facebook.com/LlibreriaQuera; Liceu; map. The most knowledgeable place in town for Catalan and Pyrenean maps and trekking guides, plus anything else to do with the great outdoors. Tues 10am–8pm, Wed–Sat 10am–1.30pm & 4.30–8pm; closed Aug.


CLOTHES, SHOES AND ACCESSORIES
DESIGNER FASHION
La Comercial C/Rec 73, La Ribera 933 192 435, lacomercial.info; Jaume I; map. Five boutiques plus a showroom – all clustered around C/Rec – comprise the fabulous La Comercial, which carries a carefully curated selection of on-trend men’s and women’s fashion, fragrances and chic home decor. The C/Rec 77 location is a “pop-up” which houses a different brand each season. Mon–Thurs 11am–9pm, Fri & Sat 11am–9.30pm.
Coquette C/Rec 65, La Ribera 933 192 976, coquettebcn.com; Jaume I; map. A beautiful space, with high ceilings, velvet curtains and a vast mother-of-pearl chandelier, Coquette specializes in feminine but unfussy fashion for women, with pieces from French and Spanish designers such as Isabel Marant, Anthology Paris and Intropia. The clothes are complemented by a small but carefully chosen selection of bags, shoes and jewellery, many of which have an appealing vintage feel. Their second boutique, at C/Bonaire 5, also has men’s fashion, and there’s a third shop uptown at C/Madrazo 153. Mon–Fri 11am–3pm & 5–9pm, Sat 11.30am–9pm.
Custo Barcelona Pl. de les Olles 7, La Ribera 932 687 893; Barceloneta; map; Pl. del Pi 2, Barri Gòtic 933 042 753; Liceu; map; custo.com. Selling hugely colourful designer tops and sweaters for men and women, this is where the stars get their T-shirts. Last season’s gear gets another whirl at the Pl. del Pi discount outlet in the Barri Gòtic. Mon–Sat 10am–9pm, Sun noon–8pm.
Natalie Capell Atelier de Moda C/Banys Vells 4, entrance at C/Carassa 2, La Ribera 933 199 219, nataliecapell.com; Jaume I; map. Where “each dress carries a story”. The boutique stocks Natalie Capell’s own very elegant designs, in 1920s- and 1930s-style, every one sewn and colour-dyed by hand. Tues–Sat noon–8.30pm.
Petit Gegant C/Parlament 65, Sant Antoni 933 297 516, facebook.com/petitgegant; Poble Sec; map. On what is currently Barcelona’s coolest street, this small boutique, hung with bunting and balloons, is a stylish mummy’s dream. Kit out your tot in colourful designs (age range from 0 to 8), with funky T-shirts, sleepsuits and leggings, plus bibs, muslins and organic lotions. Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8.15pm.
JEWELLERY, TEXTILES AND ACCESSORIES
Iriarte Iriarte C/Cotoners 12, La Ribera 932 690 074, iriarteiriarte.com; Jaume I; map. Atelier-showroom for sumptuous handmade leather bags and belts. The alley (off C/Cotoners) has several other interesting craft workshops and galleries to browse. Tues–Sat 4.30–8.30pm.
Obach Sombrería C/Call 2, Barri Gòtic 933 184 094; Liceu; map. For traditional hats of all kinds, hats and caps to berets and Stetsons. Mon–Fri 9.30am–1.30pm & 4–8pm, Sat 10am–2pm & 4.30–8pm.
SECONDHAND, VINTAGE AND DISCOUNT OUTLETS
Holala! Plaza Pl. de Castella 2, El Raval 933 020 593, holala-ibiza.com; Universitat; map. Vintage heaven in a warehouse setting (up past CCCB) for denim, flying jackets, Hawaiian shirts, baseball gear and much, much more. Mon–Sat 11am–9pm.
El Mercadillo C/Portaferrissa 17, Barri Gòtic 933 018 913; Liceu; map. The camel at the entrance marks this hippy-dippy indoor street market of shops and stalls selling T-shirts, skatewear, vintage gear and jewellery. Mon–Sat 9am–9pm.
La Roca Village La Roca del Vallès  938 423 939, larocavillage.com. The out-of-town outlet mall is one for serious designer discount-hounds, with a hundred stores selling designer gear at up to sixty percent off normal prices. It’s half an hour from the city centre and you can get there directly by bus – there are full transport details on the website. Mon–Sat 1–9pm (June to mid-Sept until 10pm).
SHOES
La Manual Alpargatera C/Avinyó 7, Barri Gòtic 933 010 172, lamanualalpargatera.com; Liceu; map. In this traditional workshop they make and sell alpargates (espadrilles) to order, as well as producing other items using straw, rope- and basketwork. Mon–Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 4.30–8pm.
U-Casas C/Espaseria 4, La Ribera 933 100 046, casasclub.com; Jaume I; map. Casas has four lines of shoe stores across Spain, with the U-Casas brand at the younger end of the market. Never mind the shoes, the stores themselves (right across town) are pretty spectacular, especially at the branch in the Born where an enormous shoe-shaped bench-cum-sofa takes centre-stage. Mon–Thurs 10.30am–8.30pm, Fri & Sat 10.30am–9pm.
DEPARTMENT STORES AND SHOPPING MALLS
Arenas de Barcelona Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 373–385, Esquerra de l’Eixample 932 890 244, arenasdebarcelona.com; Espanya; map. This designer mall is a glam refit of a former bull-ring, and while it’s bigger on leisure facilities than shops and boutiques, you won’t want to miss the view from the circular rooftop promenade. Mon–Sat 10am–10pm.
Glòries Avgda. Diagonal 208 at Pl. de les Glòries Catalanes, Glòries 934 860 404, lesglories.com; Glòries; map. Huge mall with all the national high-street fashion names (H&M, Zara, Bershka, Mango and FNAC) as well as a big Carrefour supermarket, children’s wear, toys and games, ice-cream parlours, a dozen bars, cafés and restaurants and a seven-screen cinema complex. Mon–Sat 10am–10pm.
El Triangle Pl. de Catalunya 4 933 180 108, eltriangle.es; Catalunya; map. Shopping centre at the top of the Ramblas, dominated by the flagship FNAC store, which specializes in books (good English-language selection), music, film and computer stuff. Also a Camper (for shoes), and Sephora (cosmetics), plus lots of boutiques, and a café on the ground floor next to the extensive newspaper and magazine section. Mon–Sat 10am–10pm.
DESIGN, DECORATIVE ART AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS
Cubiña C/Mallorca 291, Dreta de l’Eixample 934 765 721, cubinya.es; Verdaguer; map. The building itself is stupendous – Domènech i Montaner’s modernista Casa Thomas – while the inside holds the very latest in household design, from slinky CD racks to €5000 dining tables. Mon–Sat 10am–2pm & 4.30–8.30pm (closed Sat June–July); closed in Aug.
Germanes García C/Banys Nous 15, Barri Gòtic 933 186 646, germanesgarcia.com; Liceu; map. Who knew you could make quite so much stuff out of basket-, raffia- and wicker-work? The enormous warehouse-showroom has everything from cradles to tables, plant-holders to wardrobes. Mon 4.30–8pm, Tues–Sat 9.30am–1.30pm & 4.30–8pm.
Gotham C/Lleó 28, El Raval 932 696 750, gotham-bcn.com; Universitat; map. The place to come for retro (1950s to 1980s) furniture, lighting, homeware and accessories, plus original designs. Mon–Fri 5–8pm, other times by appointment only.
Vitra Pl. Comercial 5, La Ribera 932 687 219, vitra.com; Jaume I; map. Home and workplace furniture specialist with stunning chairs and furniture by the likes of Frank Gehry, Philippe Starck, Charles and Ray Eames and Ron Arad. Mon–Thurs 9am–2pm & 5–7pm, Fri 9am–2pm.
FOOD AND DRINK
There’s a full list of city markets at ajuntament.barcelona.cat/mercats. The main local supermarket chain is Caprabo (caprabo.com), which has a useful branch in the Mercat de la Barceloneta, though most other branches are located in residential neighbourhoods, away from the tourist sights. The most convenient downtown supermarket is that in the basement of El Corte Inglés (Pl. de Catalunya), and there’s also the fairly basic Carrefour Market at Ramblas 113.

La Botifarreria de Santa María C/Santa María 4, La Ribera 933 199 123, labotifarreria.com; Jaume I; map. If you ever doubted the power of the humble Catalan pork sausage, drop by this designer temple-deli where otherwise beautifully behaved locals jostle at the counter for the day’s home-made botifarra, plus rigorously sourced hams, cheeses, pâtés and salamis. True disciples can even buy the T-shirt. Mon–Fri 8.30am–2.30pm & 5–8.30pm, Sat 8.30am–3pm.
Bubó C/Caputxes 10, La Ribera 932 687 224, bubo.es; Jaume I; map. There are chocolates and then there are Bubó chocolates – jewel-like creations and playful desserts by pastry maestro Carles Mampel. This very classy shop (with tastings and drinks de rigueur) is complemented by their minimalist new-wave tapas place, Bubó Bar, a couple of doors down at no. 6. Daily 10am–midnight.
La Campana C/Princesa 36, La Ribera 933 197 296, turroneslacampana.com; Jaume I; map. This gorgeous shop from 1890 stocks handmade pralines and truffles, but it’s best known for its beautifully packaged squares and slabs of torró, traditional Catalan nougat. Daily 10am–9pm. Closed Feb.
Casa Gispert C/Sombrerers 23, La Ribera 933 197 535, casagispert.com; Jaume I; map. Roasters of nuts, coffee and spices for over 150 years, Casa Gispert have a truly delectable store of wooden boxes, baskets, stacked shelves and tantalizing smells. There are organic nuts and dried fruit, teas and gourmet deli items available too. Tues–Sat 10am–8.30pm.
A Casa Portuguesa C/Or 8, Gràcia; 930 218 803, acasaportuguesa.com; Fontana; map. This inviting café and deli is a showcase for the food, wine and culture of Portugal. Call in for a break while trawling the designer and streetwear stores of nearby C/Verdi – they make Portuguese specialities daily (including the famous pasteis de Belém, little custard tarts), and have a full programme of wine tastings, food festivals and other events. Daily 10.30am–9pm.
La Colmena Plaça de l’Àngel 12, Barri Gòtic 933 151 356, pastisserialacolmena.com; Jaume I; map. Established in 1849, “the hive” has a huge range of traditional Catalan cakes, pastries and sweets prettily displayed in wooden cabinets in its carefully preserved interior. In autumn, try the panellets (marzipan balls, often covered with pine nuts) or choose a bag of the prettily wrapped sweets that have been handmade to the same recipe for well over a century. Daily 9am–9pm.
Formatgeria La Seu C/Daguería 16, Barri Gòtic 934 126 548, formatgerialaseu.com; Jaume I; map. Sells the best farmhouse cheeses from independent producers all over Spain. Chatty Scottish owner Katherine is usually on hand to advise, and you can try before you buy with a €3 tasting plate – ask about the formatgelat, a cheese-ice cream fusion that’s unique to the shop. Tues–Sat 10am–2pm & 5–8pm; closed Aug.
Entre Latas C/Parlament 7, Sant Antoni 930 154 725, entrelatas-bcn.com; Jaume I; map. A truly charming shop, with beautifully arranged displays of stylishly packed gourmet tinned goods, from smoked sardines from Riga to razor clams from Galicia. To go with them, pick up a box of gourmet crackers and a bottle of vermouth, all equally attractively packaged. Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 5–8.30pm, Sat 11am–2pm & 5–8.30pm.
Forn Baluard C/Baluard 38–40, Barceloneta 932 211 208, baluardbarceloneta.com; Barceloneta; map. There are scores of bakeries in Barcelona and every neighbourhood has its favourite, but when push comes to shove, foodies pick the Baluard, right next to Barceloneta market, where their passion for artisan bread, cakes and pastries knows no bounds. Mon–Sat 8am–9pm.
Papabubble C/Ample 28, Barri Gòtic 933 196 608, papabubble.com; Drassanes; map. Groovy young things rolling out home-made candy to a chill-out soundtrack. Come and watch them at work, sample a sweetie, and take home a gorgeously wrapped gift. Mon–Fri 10am–2pm & 4–8.30pm, Sat 10am–8.30pm.
Vila Viniteca C/Agullers 7, La Ribera 937 777 017, vilaviniteca.es; Barceloneta; map. A very knowledgeable specialist in Catalan and Spanish wines. Pick your vintage and then nip over the road for the gourmet deli part of the operation. Mon–Sat 8.30am–8.30pm (July & Aug closes Sat at 2pm).
DAILY FOOD MARKETS
Mercat de la Barceloneta Pl. de la Font, Barceloneta; Barceloneta; map.
Mercat de la Concepció C/Valencia, Dreta de l’Eixample; Passeig de Gràcia; map.
Mercat de Galvany C/Santaló 65, Sant Gervasi; María Cristina; map.
Mercat de la Llibertat Pl. de la Llibertat, Gràcia; Fontana; map.
Mercat del Ninot C/Mallorca 133, Esquerra de l’Eixample; Hospital Clinic; map.
MARKETS
Farmers’ market Pl. del Pi, Barri Gòtic; Liceu. Specializes in honey, cheese, cakes and other produce. Also takes place during the Festa de la Mercè (Sept), and the Festa de Sant Ponç in C/Hospital (May 11). First and third Fri–Sun of the month.
Flea market Els Encants, Avgda. Meridiana 69, Glòries; Glòries/Encants. The most entertaining place to trawl through old clothes, jewellery, antiques, junk and furniture is the city’s oldest flea market, which is now in its shiny (literally) new home on the southwest side of Pl. de les Glòries Catalanes. Every Mon, Wed, Fri & Sat 9am–8pm, plus Dec 1–Jan 5 Sun 9am–3pm.

MUSEUMS, GALLERIES AND ATTRACTIONS
CosmoCaixa C/Issac Newton 26, Tibidabo obrasocial.lacaixa.es; FGC Avgda. del Tibidabo; map. The shop in the science museum is the place to buy space jigsaws, planet mobiles, model lunar-rovers, dinosaur kits, star charts and natural history books. Tues–Sun 10am–8.30pm.
Fundació Joan Miró Parc Montjuïc, Montjuïc miroshop.com; Espanya; map. The artist’s mark is on almost everything, from bibs and beakers to watches and necklaces. Tues, Wed & Fri 10am–8pm (until 6pm Nov–March), Thurs 10am–9pm, Sat 10am–8pm, Sun 10am–3pm.

MUSIC
Casa Beethoven Ramblas 97 933 014 826; Liceu; map. Wonderful old shop selling sheet music, CDs and music reference books – classical, but also rock, jazz and flamenco. Mon, Tues, Thurs & Fri 9am–8pm, Wed 9am–2pm & 4–8pm, Sat 9am–2pm & 5–8pm; closed Aug.
Discos Paradiso C/Ferlandina 39, El Raval 933 296 440, discosparadiso.com; Universitat; map. A vinyl-lover’s paradise, especially for those with a penchant for electronic music. Techno, dubstep and house aside, there are plenty of offerings for indie, funk and world music fans as well. Mon–Fri 11am–9pm, Sat noon–9pm.
Revólver Records C/Tallers 11, El Raval 934 126 248, revolverrecords.es; Catalunya; map. Revólver sells the city’s best selection of vinyl at the lowest prices. Defiantly old-school, it’s a record shop like they used to make them. Next door to its near-identically named but separately run sister shop, Discos Revólver. Mon–Sat 10am–8.30pm.
Wah Wah Discos C/Riera Baixa 14, El Raval 934 423 703, wah-wahsupersonic.com; Liceu; map. Vinyl heaven for record collectors – rock, indie, garage, 1970s punk, electronica, blues, folk, prog, jazz, soul and rarities of all kinds. Mon–Sat 11am–2pm & 5–8.30pm.
SPORTS
Botiga del Barça FC Barcelona, Camp Nou, Les Corts 934 923 111, fcbarcelona.es; Collblanc/Palau Reial; map. For official merchandise the stadium megastore has it all – including that all-important lettering service for the back of the shirt that elevates you to the squad. Mon–Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 10.30am–3pm, match days until kick-off.
Decathlon C/Canuda 20, at Pl. Vila de Madrid, Barri Gòtic 933 426 161, decathlon.es; Catalunya; map. They’ve got clothes and equipment for 63 sports in the old-town megastore, so you’re bound to find what you want. Also bike rental and repair. Mon–Sat 9.30am–9.30pm.
TOYS, MAGIC, COSTUME AND PARTY WEAR
El Ingenio C/Rauric 6–8, Barri Gòtic 933 177 138, elingenio.cat; Liceu; map. Juggling, magic and street-performer shop with a modernista store-front. It’s also the place to come for carnival costumes and masks, made in the workshop on the premises. Mon–Sat 10.30am–1.30pm & 4.15–8pm.
El Rey de la Màgia C/Princesa 11, Sant Pere 933 193 920, elreydelamagia.com; Jaume I; map. Spain’s oldest magic shop contains all the tricks of the trade, from rubber chickens to Dracula capes. They also have an associated magic school and theatre, with events and performances posted on the website. Mon–Sat 10.30am–2pm & 4–7.30pm.

< Back to Shopping



=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================



Barcelona
Home to cutting-edge architecture, world-class dining and pulsating nightlife, Barcelona has long been one of Europe's most alluring destinations. Days are spent wandering the cobblestone lanes of the Gothic quarter, basking on Mediterranean beaches or marvelling at Gaudí masterpieces across the city. By night, Barcelona is a whirl of vintage cocktail bars, gilded music halls, innovative eateries and dance-loving clubs, with the party extending well into the night. There are also colourful markets, hallowed arenas (such as Camp Nou where FC Barcelona plays), and a calendar packed with traditional Catalan festivals.


Itineraries

Barcelona & Around

1 WEEK
Spend a lifetime in Barcelona and it may not be enough, filled as it is with so many intensely wonderful experiences. But drag yourself away, and you'll soon discover that the wider Catalonia region is a brilliant place to explore.
You'll need a minimum of two days in Barcelona to soak up Gaudí, taste the city's culinary excellence and wander its old town. When you can tear yourself away, rent a car and head north along the Mediterranean shoreline, passing through Tossa de Mar and its castle-backed bay, then Calella de Palafrugell and Tamariu, two beautifully sited coastal villages, before heading inland to pass the night in wonderful Girona. The next day is all about Salvador Dalí, from his fantasy castle Castell de Puból to his extraordinary theatre-museum in Figueres, and then his one-time home, the lovely seaside village of Cadaqués. The next morning leave the Mediterranean behind and drive west in the shadow of the Pyrenees – a long day in the saddle, but a day with one jaw-dropping vista after another. Your reward is a couple of nights based in Taüll, gateway to the utterly magnificent Parc Nacional d'Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici. A loop south via Lleida then east will have you back in Barcelona by midafternoon on your final day.




Barcelona
Artistry of the Past
A once-vibrant settlement of ancient Rome, Barcelona has over 2000 years of history hidden in its old lanes. The old Gothic centre has 14th-century churches and medieval mansions that hold more recent treasures, from a sprawling Picasso collection to pre-Columbian masterpieces.
Regions at a Glance


Catalonia
The Catalan Kitchen
Vying with the Basque Country for Spain's highest per-capita ratio of celebrity chefs, Catalonia is something of a pilgrimage for gastronomes. Here, even in the smallest family establishments, cooks fuse ingredients from land and sea, always keeping faith with rich culinary traditions even as they head off in innovative new directions.
The Catalan Coast
The picturesque coastlines known as the Costa Brava and Costa Daurada are studded with pretty-as-a-postcard villages and beaches that are generally less crowded than those further south. And not far away, signposts to Salvador Dalí and the Romans make for fine day trips.
Spain's High Country
Northern Catalonia means the Pyrenees, where shapely peaks and quiet valleys offer some of the best hiking anywhere in the country.



========NEW




Barcelona



Best Places to Eat
A Disfrutar
A Cinc Sentits
A Tickets
A Tapas 24
A Cal Pep
Best Places to Sleep
A DO Reial
A Hotel Casa Fuster
A Hotel Brummell
A Cotton House
A Serras Hotel
Barcelona Highlights

2 Barri Gòtic Strolling the narrow medieval lanes of Barcelona's enchanting old quarter.
4 Camp Nou Joining the riotous carnival at an FC Barça match in this hallowed stadium.
5 Park Güell Drinking in the views from Gaudí’s fabulous creation.
8 La Barceloneta Feasting on fresh seafood, followed by a stroll along the boardwalk.
a Montjuïc Exploring this hilltop bastion of Romanesque art, a brooding fort, Miró and beautiful gardens.




BARCELONA IN...

TWO DAYS
Start with the Barri Gòtic. After a stroll along La Rambla, wade into the labyrinth to admire La Catedral and the Museu d’Història de Barcelona on historic Plaça del Rei. Cross Via Laietana into La Ribera for the city’s most beloved church, the Basilica de Santa Maria del Mar, and the nearby Museu Picasso. Round off with a meal and cocktails in the funky El Born area.
The following day, start with a walk through Gaudí’s unique Park Güell, then head for his work in progress, La Sagrada Família. Afterwards, head to El Raval for dinner at the innovative Suculent followed by drinks at Bar Marsella.
FOUR DAYS
Start the third day with more Gaudí, visiting Casa Batlló and La Pedrera, followed by beachside relaxation and seafood in Barceloneta. Day four should be dedicated to Montjuïc, with its museums, galleries, fortress, gardens and Olympic stadium.
ONE WEEK
With three extra days, take in El Raval, Gràcia, a game at Camp Nou, Tibidabo views, and the wooded paths of Collserola. A tempting one-day excursion is Montserrat,Catalonia’s ‘sacred mountain’. Or spend a day at the beach at Sitges.

oMuseu d'Història de BarcelonaMUSEUM
(MUHBA; MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 256 21 00; www.museuhistoria.bcn.cat; Plaça del Rei; adult/concession/child €7/5/free, 3-8pm Sun & 1st Sun of month free; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat, 10am-8pm Sun; mJaume I)
One of Barcelona's most fascinating museums takes you back through the centuries to the very foundations of Roman Barcino. You'll stroll over ruins of the old streets, sewers, laundries and wine- and fish-making factories that flourished here following the town's founding by Emperor Augustus around 10 BC. Equally impressive is the building itself, which was once part of the Palau Reial Major (Grand Royal Palace) on Plaça del Rei, among the key locations of medieval princely power in Barcelona.


Museu d'Idees i Invents de BarcelonaMUSEUM
(Museum of Ideas & Inventions; MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 332 79 30; www.mibamuseum.com; Carrer de la Ciutat 7; adult/concession/child under 4yr €8/6/free; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm Tue-Fri, 10am-8pm Sat, to 2pm Sun; mJaume I)
Although the price is a bit steep for such a small museum (though they've now introduced a secondary system of €0.20 per minute), the collection makes for an amusing browse over an hour or so. You'll find both brilliant and bizarre inventions on display.

Temple Romà d’AugustRUINS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 256 21 22; Carrer del Paradis 10; h10am-2pm Mon, to 7pm Tue-Sat, to 8pm Sun; mJaume I)F
Opposite the southeast end of La Catedral, narrow Carrer del Paradis leads towards Plaça de Sant Jaume. Inside No 10, an intriguing building with Gothic and baroque touches, are four columns and the architrave of Barcelona’s main Roman temple, dedicated to Caesar Augustus and built to worship his imperial highness in the 1st century AD.


2City Walk
Hidden Treasures in the Barri Gòtic
START LA CATEDRAL
END PLAÇA DEL REI
LENGTH 1.5KM; 1½ HOURS
This scenic walk through the Barri Gòtic will take you back in time, from the early days of Roman-era Barcino through to the medieval era.
Before entering the cathedral, have a look at 1three Picasso friezes on the building facing the square. After noting his signature style, wander through 2La Catedral; don't miss the cloister with its flock of 13 geese. Leaving the cathedral, enter the former gates of the ancient fortified city and turn right into 3Plaça de Sant Felip Neri. Note the shrapnel-scarred walls of the old church, damaged by pro-Francist bombers in 1939. A plaque commemorates the victims (mostly children) of the bombing.
Head out of the square and turn right. On this narrow lane, you'll spot a small 4statue of Santa Eulàlia, one of Barcelona's patron saints who suffered various tortures during her martyrdom. Make your way west to the looming 14th-century 5Església de Sant Maria del Pi, which is famed for its magnificent rose window. Follow the curving road and zigzag down to 6Plaça Reial, one of Barcelona's prettiest squares. Flanking the fountain are lamp posts designed by Antoni Gaudí.
Stroll up to Carrer de la Boqueria and turn left on Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call. This leads into the El Call district, once the heart of the medieval Jewish quarter, until the bloody pogrom of 1391. The 7Sinagoga Major, one of Europe's oldest, was discovered in 1996. Head across Plaça de Sant Jaume and turn left after Carrer del Bisbe. You'll soon pass the entrance to the remnants of a 8Roman Temple, with four columns hidden in a small courtyard.
The final stop is 9Plaça del Rei, a picturesque plaza where Fernando and Isabel received Columbus following his first New World voyage. The former palace today houses a superb history museum, with significant Roman ruins underground.




El Raval



La Ribera
Castell dels Tres DragonsARCHITECTURE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; mArc de Triomf)
The Passeig de Picasso side of Parc de la Ciutadella is lined by several buildings constructed for, or just before, the Universal Exhibition of 1888. The medieval-looking caprice at the top end is the most engaging. Known as the Castell dels Tres Dragons (Castle of the Three Dragons), it long housed the Museu de Zoologia, which has since been transferred to the Fòrum area.

Museu del Rei de la MagiaMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 318 71 92; www.elreydelamagia.com; Carrer de les Jonqueres 15; adult/concession & child €5/3; h11am-2pm & 4-8pm Tue-Sun, closed Sun morning Jul & Aug; c; mUrquinaona)
This museum is a timeless curio. It is the scene of magic shows, home to collections of material that hark back to the 19th-century origins of the associated magic shop at Carrer de la Princesa 11, and the place for budding magicians of all ages to enrol in courses. Seeing is believing.
Parc de la CiutadellaPARK
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Passeig de Picasso; c; mArc de Triomf)
Come for a stroll, a picnic, a visit to the zoo or to inspect Catalonia’s regional parliament, but don’t miss a visit to this, the most central green lung in the city. Parc de la Ciutadella is perfect for winding down.
Parlament de CatalunyaHISTORIC BUILDING
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 304 65 00; www.parlament.cat; hguided tours 10am-1pm Sat, Sun & holidays; mArc de Triomf)F
Southeast, in the fort's former arsenal, is the regional Parlament de Catalunya. You can join free guided tours, in Catalan and Spanish (Castilian) only, on Saturdays and Sundays; sign up online in advance. The building is open for independent visiting on 11 September from 10am to 7pm. Most interesting is the sweeping Escala d’Honor (Stairway of Honour) and the several solemn halls that lead to the Saló de Sessions, the semicircular auditorium where parliament sits.
Zoo de BarcelonaZOO
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %902 457545; www.zoobarcelona.cat; Parc de la Ciutadella; adult/child €19.90/11.95; h10am-5.30pm Nov-Mar, 10am-7pm Apr, May, Sep & Oct, 10am-8pm Jun-Aug; c; mBarceloneta)
The zoo is a great day out for kids, with 7500 critters that range from geckos to gorillas, lions and elephants – there are more than 400 species, plus picnic areas dotted all around and a wonderful adventure playground. There are pony rides, a petting zoo and a mini-train meandering through the grounds. Thanks to recent advances in legislation prohibiting the use of animals for performances (including circuses and bullfighting) the zoo called time on its dolphin shows in late 2015.

Barceloneta & the Waterfront
The formerly industrial waterfront has experienced a dramatic transformation in the last three decades, with sparkling beaches and seaside bars and restaurants, elegant sculptures, a 4.5km-long boardwalk, ultramodern high-rises and yacht-filled marinas. Your gateway to the Mediterranean is the gridlike neighbourhood of Barceloneta, an old-fashioned fishing quarter full of traditional seafood eateries.

Passeig Marítim de la BarcelonetaPROMENADE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; mBarceloneta, Ciutadella Vila Olímpica)
On La Barceloneta's seaward side are the first of Barcelona's beaches, which are popular on summer weekends. The pleasant Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta, a 1.25km promenade from La Barceloneta to Port Olímpic, is a haunt for strollers and runners, with cyclists zipping by on a separate path nearby.
oPlatjesBEACH
( GOOGLE MAP ; g36, 41, mCiutadella Vila Olímpic, Bogatell, Llacuna, Selva de Mar)
A series of pleasant beaches stretches northeast from the Port Olímpic marina. They are largely artificial, but this doesn’t stop an estimated seven million bathers from piling in every year!
Edge BrewingBREWERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.edgebrewing.com; Carrer de Llull 62; tours incl beer tastings €20; htours by appointment; mBogatell)
Founded by two Americans back in 2013, Edge Brewing has already racked up some impressive awards for its craft beers (among other things it was named top new brewer in the world in 2014 by RateBeer.com). On a brewery tour, you'll get a behind-the-scenes look at Edge's operations, and get to taste some of its classic (like the Hoptimista, an award-winning 6.6% IPA) and seasonal brews (the summertime Apassionada is a passionfruit sour ale).
Museu Can FramisMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 320 87 36; www.fundaciovilacasas.com; Carrer de Roc Boronat 116; adult/student €5/2; h11am-6pm Tue-Sat, to 2pm Sun; mGlòries, Llacuna)
Set in a former textile factory, this contemporary museum is a showcase for Catalan painting of the past 60 years. The galleries display some 300 works, arranged in thought-provoking ways – with evocative paintings by different artists (sometimes working in different time periods) creating fascinating intersections and collisions.

La Sagrada Família & L'Eixample

Casa Lleó MoreraARCHITECTURE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 676 27 33; www.casalleomorera.com; Passeig de Gràcia 35; guided tour adult/concession/under 12yr €15/13.50/free, express tour adult/under 12yr €12/free; h10am-1.30pm & 3-7pm Tue-Sun; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Domènech i Montaner’s 1905 contribution to the Manzana de la Discordia, with Modernista carving outside and a bright, tiled lobby in which floral motifs predominate, is perhaps the least odd-looking of the three main buildings on the block. Since 2014 part of the building has been open to the public (by guided tour only – a one-hour tour in English at 11am, and 'express tours' every 30 minutes), so you can appreciate the 1st floor, giddy with swirling sculptures, rich mosaics and whimsical decor.
Museu del PerfumMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 216 01 21; www.museudelperfum.com; Passeig de Gràcia 39; adult/concession €5/3; h10.30am-8pm Mon-Fri, 11am-2pm Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Housed in the back of the Regia perfume store ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 216 01 21; www.regia.es; Passeig de Gràcia 39; h9.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia), this museum contains oddities from ancient Egyptian and Roman scent receptacles (the latter mostly from the 1st to 3rd centuries AD) to classic eau de cologne bottles – all in all, some 5000 bottles of infinite shapes, sizes and histories. Other items include ancient bronze Etruscan tweezers and little early-19th-century potpourri bowls made of fine Sèvres porcelain. Also on show are old catalogues and advertising posters.
Palau del Baró QuadrasARCHITECTURE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 467 80 00; www.llull.cat; Avinguda Diagonal 373; h8am-8pm Mon-Fri; mDiagonal)F
Puig i Cadafalch designed Palau del Baró Quadras (built 1902–06) in an exuberant Gothic-inspired style. The main facade is its most intriguing, with a soaring, glassed-in gallery. Take a closer look at the gargoyles and reliefs – the pair of toothy fish and the sword-wielding knight clearly have the same artistic signature as the architect behind Casa Amatller. Decor inside is eclectic, but dominated by Middle Eastern and East Asian themes.
Recinte Modernista de Sant PauARCHITECTURE
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 553 78 01; www.santpaubarcelona.org; Carrer de Sant Antoni Maria Claret 167; adult/concession/under 16yr €10/7/free; h10am-6.30pm Mon-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun; mSant Pau/Dos de Maig)
Domènech i Montaner outdid himself as architect and philanthropist with the Modernista Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau, redubbed in 2014 the 'Recinte Modernista'. It was long considered one of the city’s most important hospitals, and was only recently repurposed, its various spaces becoming cultural centres, offices and something of a monument. The complex, including 16 pavilions is lavishly decorated and each pavilion is unique.
Palau RobertEXHIBITION
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 238 80 91; www.palaurobert.gencat.cat; Passeig de Gràcia 107; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun; mDiagonal)F
Catalonia's regional tourist office, which holds a huge range of books and leaflets, also serves as an exhibition space, mostly for shows with Catalan themes. In summer concerts are occasionally held in the peaceful gardens at the back of this fine building, or in its main hall.
Casa de les PunxesARCHITECTURE
(Casa Terrades; MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Avinguda Diagonal 420; mDiagonal)
Puig i Cadafalch’s Casa Terrades is better known as the Casa de les Punxes (House of Spikes) because of its pointed turrets. This apartment block, completed in 1905, looks like a fairy-tale castle and has the singular attribute of being the only fully detached building in L’Eixample.
Sala Fundación MAPFREGALLERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 401 26 03; www.fundacionmapfre.org; Carrer de la Diputació 250; adult/student/under 6yr €6/3/free; h2-8pm Mon, 10am-8pm Tue-Sat, 11am-7pm Sun; mPasseig de Gràcia)F
Formerly the Fundación Francisco Godia, this stunning, carefully restored Modernista residence was taken over in late 2015 by the charitable cultural arm of Spanish insurance giants MAPFRE as a space for art and photography exhibitions. Housed in the Casa Garriga i Nogués, it is a stunning, carefully restored Modernista residence originally built for a rich banking family by Enric Sagnier in 1902–05.
Palau MontanerARCHITECTURE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 317 76 52; www.fundaciotapies.org; Carrer de Mallorca 278; adult/child €7/free; hguided tours 11am Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Interesting on the outside and made all the more enticing by its gardens, this creation by Domènech i Montaner is spectacular on the inside. Completed in 1896, its central feature is a grand staircase beneath a broad, ornamental skylight. The interior is laden with sculptures (some by Eusebi Arnau), mosaics and fine woodwork. It is currently only open by guided tour, organised by the Fundació Tàpies and in Catalan only.
Fundació SuñolGALLERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 496 10 32; www.fundaciosunol.org; Passeig de Gràcia 98; adult/concession €4/3; h11am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Fri, 4-8pm Sat; mDiagonal)
Rotating exhibitions of portions of this private collection of mostly 20th-century art (some 1200 works in total) offer anything from Man Ray’s photography to sculptures by Alberto Giacometti. Over two floors, you are most likely to run into Spanish artists, anyone from Picasso to Jaume Plensa, along with a sprinkling of international artists.
Gràcia & Park Güell
Gràcia was an independent town until the 1890s. Its narrow lanes and picturesque plazas still have a village-like feel, and it has long been a magnet to a young, hip, largely international crowd. Here you'll find well-worn cafes and bars, vintage shops and a smattering of multicultural eateries. On a hill to the north lies the outdoor Modernista storybook of Park Güell, yet another captivating work by Gaudí.
oPark GüellPARK
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 409 18 31; www.parkguell.cat; Carrer d’Olot 7; admission to central area adult/child €8/6; h8am-9.30pm May-Aug, to 8pm Sep-Apr; g24, 32, mLesseps, Vallcarca)
North of Gràcia and about 4km from Plaça de Catalunya, Park Güell is where Gaudí turned his hand to landscape gardening. It’s a strange, enchanting place where his passion for natural forms really took flight – to the point where the artificial almost seems more natural than the natural.

Park Güell | Lonely Planet ©
Gaudí ExperienceTHEATRE
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 285 44 40; Carrer de Larrard 41; adult/child €9/7.50; h10.30am-7pm Apr-Sep, to 5pm Oct-Mar; mLesseps, Vallcarca)
The 'Gaudí Experience' is a fun-filled Disney-style look at the life and work of Barcelona's favourite son, just a stone's throw from Park Güell. There are models of his buildings and achingly modern interactive exhibits and touchscreens, but the highlight is the stomach-churning 4D presentation in its tiny screening room. Not recommended for the frail or children aged under six years.
Mercat de la LlibertatMARKET
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 217 09 95; www.mercatllibertat.com; Plaça de la Llibertat 27; h8am-8pm Mon-Fri, 8am-3pm Sat; dFGC Gràcia)
Built in the 1870s, the ‘Market of Liberty’ was covered over in 1893 in typically fizzy Modernista style, employing generous whirls of wrought iron. It got a considerable facelift in 2009 and has lost some of its aged charm, but the market remains emblematic of the Gràcia district: full of life and all kinds of fresh produce.
Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta
Several of Barcelona's most sacred sights nestle inside the huge expanse beyond L'Eixample. One is the peaceful monastery of Pedralbes; another is the great shrine to Catalan football, Camp Nou. Other attractions include the amusement park and great views atop Tibidabo, the wooded trails of Parc de Collserola, and a kid-friendly science museum.
oCamp Nou ExperienceMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; %902 189900; www.fcbarcelona.com; Gate 9, Avinguda de Joan XXIII; adult/child €23/18; h9.30am-7.30pm daily Apr-Sep, 10am-6.30pm Mon-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun Oct-Mar; mPalau Reial)
A pilgrimage site for football fans from the world, Camp Nou is one of Barcelona's most hallowed grounds. While nothing compares to the excitement of attending a live match, the Camp Nou Experience is a must for FC Barcelona fans. On this self-guided tour, you'll get an in-depth look at the club, starting with a museum filled with multimedia exhibits, trophies and historical displays, followed by a tour of the stadium.
oCosmoCaixaMUSEUM
(Museu de la Ciència; GOOGLE MAP ; %93 212 60 50; www.fundacio.lacaixa.es; Carrer de Isaac Newton 26; adult/child €4/free; h10am-8pm Tue-Sun; g60, dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
Kids (and kids at heart) are fascinated by displays here and this science museum remains one of the city’s most popular attractions. The single greatest highlight is the recreation over 1 sq km of flooded Amazon rainforest (Bosc Inundat). More than 100 species of Amazon flora and fauna (including anacondas, colourful poisonous frogs, and caimans) prosper in this unique, living diorama in which you can even experience a tropical downpour.
Parc d’AtraccionsAMUSEMENT PARK
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 211 79 42; www.tibidabo.cat; Plaça de Tibidabo 3-4; adult/child €30/11; hclosed Jan & Feb; gT2A from Plaça de Catalunya)
The reason most barcelonins come up to Tibidabo is for some thrills at this funfair, close to the top funicular station. Here you'll find whirling high-speed rides and high-tech 4D cinema, as well as old-fashioned amusements including an old steam train and the Museu d’Autòmats, with its collection of automated puppets dating as far back as 1880. Check the website for opening times.
Parc de CollserolaPARK
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 280 35 52; www.parcnaturalcollserola.cat; Carretera de l’Església 92; hCentre d’Informació 9.30am-3pm, Can Coll 9.30am-3pm Sun & holidays, closed Jul & Aug; dFGC Baixador de Vallvidrera, LFunicular de Vallvidrera)
Barcelonins needing an escape from the city without heading too far into the countryside seek out this extensive, 80-sq-km park in the hills. It is a great place to hike and bike, and bristles with eateries and snack bars. Pick up a map from one of the information centres (such as the Carretera de l’Església 92 location, a short walk from the Baixador de Vallvidrera train station).
Torre de CollserolaVIEWPOINT
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 406 93 54; www.torredecollserola.com; Carretera de Vallvidrera al Tibidabo; adult/child €6/4; hnoon-2pm & 3.30-8pm Wed-Sun Jul & Aug, noon-2pm & 3.30-6pm Sat & Sun Sep-Dec & Mar-Jun, closed Jan & Feb; g111, LFunicular de Vallvidrera)
Sir Norman Foster designed the 288m-high Torre de Collserola telecommunications tower, which was completed in 1992. There is an external glass lift to the visitors’ observation area, 115m up, from where there are some magnificent views – up to 70km on a clear day. All of Barcelona’s TVs and radios receive transmissions from here, and repeater stations across Catalonia are also controlled from this tower.
Jardins del Palau de PedralbesPARK
( GOOGLE MAP ; Avinguda Diagonal 686; h10am-8pm Apr-Oct, to 6pm Nov-Mar; mPalau Reial)
A few steps from busy Avinguda Diagonal lies this small enchanting green space. Sculptures, fountains, citrus trees, bamboo groves, fragrant eucalyptus, towering cypresses and bougainvillea-covered nooks lie scattered along the paths criss-crossing these peaceful gardens. Among the little-known treasures here are a vine-covered parabolic pergola and a gurgling fountain of Hercules, both designed by Antoni Gaudí.
oMuseu-Monestir de PedralbesMONASTERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 256 34 34; monestirpedralbes.bcn.cat; Baixada del Monestir 9; adult/child €5/free, 3-8pm Sun free; h10am-5pm Tue-Fri, to 7pm Sat, to 8pm Sun; g22, 63, 64, 75, dFGC Reina Elisenda)
This peaceful old convent was first opened to the public in 1983 and is now a museum of monastic life (the few remaining nuns have moved into more modern neighbouring buildings). It stands at the top of Avinguda de Pedralbes in a residential area that was countryside until the 20th century, and which remains a divinely quiet corner of Barcelona.
Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni
The hillside overlooking the port has some of the city's finest art collections: the Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya (MNAC), the Fundació Joan Miró and CaixaForum. Other galleries, gardens and an imposing castle form part of the scenery. Just below Montjuïc lies the lively tapas bars and eateries of Poble Sec, while the up-and-coming neighbourhood of Sant Antoni draws the young and hip.
oMuseu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC)MUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 622 03 76; www.museunacional.cat; Mirador del Palau Nacional; adult/student/child €12/8.40/free, after 3pm Sat & 1st Sun of month free; h10am-8pm Tue-Sat, to 3pm Sun May-Sep, to 6pm Tue-Sat Oct-Apr; mEspanya)
From across the city, the bombastic neobaroque silhouette of the Palau Nacional ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ) can be seen on the slopes of Montjuïc. Built for the 1929 World Exhibition and restored in 2005, it houses a vast collection of mostly Catalan art spanning the early Middle Ages to the early 20th century. The high point is the collection of extraordinary Romanesque frescoes.
oFundació Joan MiróMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 443 94 70; www.fmirobcn.org; Parc de Montjuïc; adult/child €12/free; h10am-8pm Tue-Sat, to 9pm Thu, to 2.30pm Sun & holidays; g55, 150, LParal·lel)
Joan Miró, the city’s best-known 20th-century artistic progeny, bequeathed this art foundation to his hometown in 1971. Its light-filled buildings, designed by close friend and architect Josep Lluís Sert (who also built Miró’s Mallorca studios), are crammed with seminal works, from Miró’s earliest timid sketches to paintings from his last years.
Castell de MontjuïcFORTRESS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 256 44 45; www.bcn.cat/castelldemontjuic; Carretera de Montjuïc 66; adult/child €5/free, after 3pm Sun free; h10am-8pm Apr-Oct, to 6pm Nov-Mar; g150, Telefèric de Montjuïc, Castell de Montjuïc)
This forbidding castell (castle or fort) dominates the southeastern heights of Montjuïc and enjoys commanding views over the Mediterranean. It dates, in its present form, from the late 17th and 18th centuries. For most of its dark history, it has been used to watch over the city and as a political prison and killing ground.
Poble EspanyolCULTURAL CENTRE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.poble-espanyol.com; Avinguda de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 13; adult/child €12/7; h9am-8pm Mon, to midnight Tue-Thu & Sun, to 3am Fri & Sat; g13, 23, 150, mEspanya)
Welcome to Spain! All of it! This ‘Spanish Village’ is both a cheesy souvenir hunters’ haunt and an intriguing scrapbook of Spanish architecture built for the Spanish crafts section of the 1929 World Exhibition. You can meander from Andalucía to the Balearic Islands in the space of a couple of hours, visiting surprisingly good copies of Spain's characteristic buildings.
Font MàgicaFOUNTAIN
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 316 10 00; Avinguda de la Reina Maria Cristina; hevery 30min 7-9pm Fri & Sat Nov-Mar, 9.30-11pm Thu-Sun Apr-Oct; mEspanya)
A huge fountain that crowns the long sweep of the Avinguda de la Reina Maria Cristina to the grand facade of the Palau Nacional, Font Màgica is a unique performance in which the water can look like seething fireworks or a mystical cauldron of colour.
Fundació Fran DaurelMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.fundaciofrandaurel.com; Avinguda Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 13; h10am-7pm; g13, 23, 150)
The Fundació Fran Daurel (in Poble Espanyol) is an eclectic collection of 300 works of art, including sculptures, prints, ceramics and tapestries by modern artists ranging from Picasso and Miró to more contemporary figures, such as Miquel Barceló. The foundation also has a sculpture garden, boasting 27 pieces, nearby the Fundació and within the grounds of Poble Espanyol (look for the Montblanc gate). Frequent temporary exhibitions broaden the offerings further.
CaixaForumGALLERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 476 86 00; www.fundacio.lacaixa.es; Avinguda de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 6-8; adult/student & child €4/free, 1st Sun of month free; h10am-8pm; p; mEspanya)
The Caixa building society prides itself on its involvement in (and ownership of) art, in particular all that is contemporary. Its premier art expo space in Barcelona hosts part of the bank’s extensive collection from around the globe. The setting is a completely renovated former factory, the Fàbrica Casaramona, an outstanding Modernista brick structure designed by Puig i Cadafalch. From 1940 to 1993 it housed the First Squadron of the police cavalry unit – 120 horses in all.

Museu EtnològicMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.museuetnologic.bcn.cat; Passeig de Santa Madrona 16-22; adult/child €5/3; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat, to 8pm Sun; g55)
Barcelona’s ethnology museum presents an intriguing permanent collection that delves into the rich heritage of Catalunya. Exhibits cover origin myths, religious festivals, folklore, and the blending of the sacred and the secular (along those lines, don't miss the Nativity scene with that quirky Catalan character el caganer, aka 'the crapper').
Museu Olímpic i de l'EsportMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 292 53 79; www.museuolimpicbcn.com; Avinguda de l'Estadi 60; adult/student €5.10/3.20; h10am-8pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2.30pm Sun; g55, 150)
The Museu Olímpic i de L'Esport is an information-packed interactive museum dedicated to the history of sport and the Olympic Games. After picking up tickets, you wander down a ramp that snakes below ground level and is lined with displays on the history of sport, starting with the ancients.
Jardí BotànicGARDENS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.museuciencies.cat; Carrer del Doctor Font i Quer 2; adult/child €3.50/free, after 3pm Sun free; h10am-7pm Apr-Sep, to 5pm Oct-Mar; g55, 150)
This botanical garden is dedicated to Mediterranean flora and has a collection of some 40,000 plants and 1500 species that thrive in areas with a climate similar to that of the Mediterranean, such as the Eastern Mediterranean, Spain (including the Balearic and Canary Islands), North Africa, Australia, California, Chile and South Africa.
Telefèric de MontjuïcCABLE CAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.telefericdemontjuic.cat; Av de Miramar 30; adult/child one way €8/6.20; h10am-9pm Jun-Sep, to 7pm Oct-May; g55, 150)
From Estació Parc Montjuïc, this cable car carries you to the Castell de Montjuïc via the mirador (lookout point).
Teleférico del PuertoCABLE CAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.telefericodebarcelona.com; Av de Miramar, Jardins de Miramar; one way/return €11/16.50; h11am-7pm Mar-Oct, to 5:30pm Nov-Feb; g50, 153)
The quickest way from the beach to the mountain is via the cable car that runs between Torre de Sant Sebastiá in La Barceloneta and the Miramar stop on Montjuïc (from mid-June to mid-September only). From Estació Parc Montjuïc, the separate Telefèric de Montjuïc cable car carries you to the Castell de Montjuïc via the mirador (lookout point).
MUHBA Refugi 307HISTORIC SITE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 256 21 22; www.museuhistoria.bcn.cat; Carrer Nou de la Rambla 169; incl tour adult/child €3.40/free; htours 10.30am, 11.30am & 2.30pm Sun; mParal·lel)
Part of the Museu d'Història de Barcelona (MUHBA), this is a shelter that dates back to the days of the Spanish Civil War. Barcelona was the city most heavily bombed from the air during the war and had more than 1300 air-raid shelters. Local citizens started digging this one under a fold of Montjuïc in March 1937.
DON'T MISS
ROMANESQUE TRASURES IN THE MUSEU NACIONAL D'ART DE CATALUNYA

The Romanesque art section in the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya constitutes one of Europe’s greatest such collections and is an absolute must for lovers of medieval art – and an excellent place to learn about it for those who have had few previous opportunities. The collection consists mainly of 11th- and 12th-century murals, woodcarvings and altar frontals – painted, bas-relief wooden panels that were forerunners of the elaborate retablos (altarpieces) that adorned later churches. Gathered from decaying rural churches in northern Catalonia early last century, they are a surprising treasure of vivid colour, discrediting the idea that medieval churches were bereft of decoration. The two outstanding items are an image of Christ in Majesty, done around 1123 and taken from the apse of the Església de Sant Climent de Taüll in northwest Catalonia, and an apse image of the Virgin Mary and Christ Child from the nearby Església de Santa Maria de Taüll.
2Activities
Mediterranean oceanfront and a rambling hilly park overlooking the city make fine settings for a bit of outdoor activity beneath the (generally) sunny skies of Barcelona. For a break from museum-hopping and overindulging at tapas bars, Barcelona has the antidote – running, swimming, cycling or simply pumping fists in the air at a never-dull FC Barça match.
Aire De BarcelonaHAMAM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 295 57 43; www.airedebarcelona.com; Passeig de Picasso 22; thermal baths & aromatherapy Mon-Thu €31, Fri-Sun €33; h10am-10pm Mon-Thu & Sun, 10am-2am Fri & Sat; mArc de Triomf)
With low lighting and relaxing perfumes wafting around you, this basement hammam could be the perfect way to end a day. Hot, warm and cold baths, steam baths and options for various massages, including on a slab of hot marble, make for a delicious hour or so. Book ahead and bring a swimming costume.
CCourses
Espai BoisàCOOKING
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 192 60 21; http://espaiboisa.com; Ptge Lluís Pellicer 8; cost varies; mHospital Clínic)S
Run by a young, multilingual Venezuelan-Catalan couple, this first-rate outfit offers cooking courses on various themes and of various lengths. They emphasise organic, seasonal ingredients from local producers outside of Barcelona – put to good use in dishes including paella, a range of tapas dishes and crema catalana (a Catalan version of crème brûlée).
Dom’s Gastronom Cookery SchoolCOURSE
(%93 674 51 60; www.domsgastronom.com; Passeig del Roser 43, Valldoreix; 8 hours of classes over 4 days €100)
Cordon-bleu chef Dominique Heathcoate runs the full gamut of Catalan, Spanish and French cuisine (and even Asian 'tapas'). It's a one-hour trip to the school from Barcelona's old centre.
TTours
Catalunya Bus TurísticBUS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 285 38 32; www.catalunyabusturistic.com; Plaça de Catalunya; mCatalunya)
Routes include a day in Colònia Güell and Montserrat (€70); Montserrat (€46); Girona and Figueres (€76); and a Penedès wine and cava jaunt with three winery tours and lunch (€69). All tours leave at 8.30am or 10.30am (Montserrat) from Plaça de Catalunya.
Barcelona Guide BureauTOURS
(%93 315 22 61; www.barcelonaguidebureau.com; Via Laietana 50)
Barcelona Guide Bureau places professional guides at the disposal of groups for tailor-made tours of the city. Several languages are catered for. It also offers a series of daily tours, from a five-hour highlights of Barcelona tour (adult/child €62/31, departing at 10am) to a trip to Montserrat, leaving Barcelona at 3pm and lasting about four hours (adult/child €48/24).

5Eating
Barcelona has a celebrated food scene fuelled by a combination of world-class chefs, imaginative recipes and magnificent ingredients fresh from farms and the sea. Catalan culinary masterminds like Ferran Adrià and Carles Abellan have become international icons, reinventing the world of haute cuisine, while classic old-world Catalan recipes continue to earn accolades in dining rooms and tapas bars across the city.
CATALAN COOKING

NEW CATALAN CUISINE
Avant-garde chefs have made Catalonia famous throughout the world for their food laboratories, their commitment to food as art and their crazy riffs on the themes of traditional local cooking.
Here the notion of gourmet cuisine is deconstructed as chefs transform liquids and solid foods into foams, create ‘ice cream’ of classic ingredients by means of liquid nitrogen, freeze-dry foods to make concentrated powders and employ spherification to create unusual and artful morsels. This alchemical cookery is known as molecular gastronomy, and invention is the keystone of this technique.
Diners may encounter olive oil ‘caviar’, ‘snow’ made of gazpacho with anchovies, jellified Parmesan turned into spaghetti, and countless other concoctions.
The dining rooms themselves also offer a reconfiguration of the five-star dining experience. Restaurateurs generally aim to create warm and buzzing spaces, with artful design flourishes, and without the stuffiness and formality typically associated with high-end dining.
CLASSIC CATALAN CUISINE
Traditional Catalan recipes showcase the great produce of the Mediterranean: fish, prawns, cuttlefish, clams, pork, rabbit, game, first-rate olive oil, peppers and loads of garlic. Classic dishes also feature unusual pairings (seafood with meat, fruit with fowl) such as cuttlefish with chickpeas, cured pork with caviar, rabbit with prawns, or goose with pears.
Great Catalan restaurants can be found in nearly every neighbourhood around town. The settings can be a huge part of the appeal, with candlelit medieval chambers in the Ciutat Vella and Modernista design in L'Eixample setting the stage for a memorable feast. Although there are plenty of high-end places in this city, foodie-minded barcelonins aren't averse to eating at humbler, less elegant places – which sometimes cook up the best meals.
La Rambla & Barri Gòtic
First things first: skip the strip. La Rambla is fine for people-watching, but no great shakes for the palate. Instead, venture off into the streets that wind into the Barri Gòtic and your belly (and wallet) will be eternally grateful. Inside the medieval labyrinth, choices abound. If you had to pinpoint any one area, it would be the eastern half of the barri (neighbourhood) near Via Laietana on the narrow streets above the cathedral (around Carrer de les Magdalenes) and between Plaça de Sant Jaume and the waterfront. Here you'll find a huddle of old-time tapas bars as well as innovative newcomers.
La PlataTAPAS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 315 10 09; www.barlaplata.com; Carrer de la Mercè 28; tapas €2.50-5; h9am-3.30pm & 6.30-11.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
Tucked away on a narrow lane near the waterfront, La Plata is a humble but well-loved bodega that serves just three plates: pescadito frito (small fried fish), butifarra (sausage) and tomato salad. Add in the drinkable, affordable wines (€1.10 per glass) and you have the makings of a fine predinner tapas spot.
XurreriaCHURROS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 318 76 91; Carrer dels Banys Nous 8; cone €1.20; h7.30am-1.30pm & 3.30-8.15pm; mJaume I)
It doesn't look much from the outside, but this brightly lit street joint is Barcelona's best spot for paper cones of piping-hot churros – long batter sticks fried and sprinkled with sugar and best enjoyed dunked in hot chocolate.
oLa Vinateria del CallSPANISH€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 302 60 92; www.lavinateriadelcall.com; Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call 9; small plates €7-12; h7.30pm-1am; mJaume I)
In a magical setting in the former Jewish quarter, this tiny jewel box of a restaurant (recently extended to add another dining room) serves up tasty Iberian dishes including Galician octopus, cider-cooked chorizo and the Catalan escalivada (roasted peppers, aubergine and onions) with anchovies. Portions are small and made for sharing, and there's a good and affordable selection of wines.
oCafè de l’AcadèmiaCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 82 53; Carrer dels Lledó 1; mains €14-18; h1-3.30pm & 8-11pm Mon-Fri; W; mJaume I)
Expect a mix of traditional Catalan dishes with the occasional creative twist. At lunchtime, local Ajuntament (town hall) office workers pounce on the menú del día (daily set menu; €14.30). In the evening it is rather more romantic, as low lighting emphasises the intimacy of the beamed ceiling and stone walls. On warm days you can also dine on the pretty square at the front.
FederalCAFE€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 280 81 71; www.federalcafe.es; Passatge de la Pau 11; mains €9-12; h9am-midnight Mon-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat, 9am-5.30pm Sun; W; mDrassanes)
Don't be intimidated by the industrial chic, the sea of open MacBooks or the stack of design mags – this branch of the Poble Sec Federal mothership is incredibly welcoming, with healthy, hearty and good-value food. Choose a salad and a topping (poached eggs, strips of chicken) or a yellow curry, say, and follow it up with a moist slab of carrot cake.
BelmonteTAPAS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 76 84; Carrer de la Mercè 29; tapas €4-10, mains €12; h8pm-midnight Tue-Sat, plus 1-3.30pm Sat; W; mJaume I)
This tiny tapas joint in the southern reaches of Barri Gòtic whips up beautifully prepared small plates – including an excellent truita (tortilla), rich patatons a la sal (salted new potatoes with romesco sauce) and tender carpaccio de pop (octopus carpaccio). Wash it down with the housemade vermut (vermouth).
MilkBRUNCH€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 268 09 22; www.milkbarcelona.com; Carrer d'en Gignàs 21; mains €8-12; h9am-2am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
Also known to many as an enticing cocktail spot, Irish-run Milk’s key role for Barcelona night owls is providing morning-after brunches (served till 4.30pm). Avoid direct sunlight and tuck into pancakes, eggs Benedict and other hangover dishes in a cosy lounge-like setting complete with ornate wallpaper, framed prints on the wall and cushion-lined seating. The musical selection is also notable.
Can CulleretesCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 317 30 22; www.culleretes.com; Carrer Quintana 5; mains €10-17; h1.30-4pm & 9-11pm Tue-Sat, 1.30-4pm Sun; mLiceu)
Founded in 1786, Barcelona's oldest restaurant is still going strong, with tourists and locals flocking here to enjoy its rambling interior, old-fashioned tile-filled decor and enormous helpings of traditional Catalan food, including fresh seafood and sticky stews.

El Raval
For contrast alone, El Raval is possibly the most interesting part of the old city. Timeless classics of Barcelona dining are scattered across what was long the old city’s poorest barri (district),and since the late 1990s, battalions of hip new eateries and artsy restaurants can be found in the area around the MACBA. Some of the cheapest eats in town, full of character, lurk along El Raval’s streets. From Carrer de Sant Pau north towards Carrer de Pelai, the university and Ronda de Sant Antoni is where you’ll find most of these haunts.
ElisabetsCATALAN€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 317 58 26; Carrer d’Elisabets 2-4; mains €8-10, menú del día €10.85; h7.30am-11.30pm Mon-Sat Sep-Jul; mCatalunya)
This unassuming restaurant is popular for no-nonsense local fare. The walls are dotted with old radio sets and the menú del día (daily set menu) varies daily. If you prefer a la carta, try the ragú de jabalí (wild boar stew) and finish with mel i mató (Catalan dessert made from cheese and honey).
SésamoVEGETARIAN€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 441 64 11; Carrer de Sant Antoni Abat 52; tapas €6; h8pm-midnight Tue-Sun; v; mSant Antoni)
Widely held to be the best veggie restaurant in the city (admittedly not as great an accolade as it might be elsewhere), Sésamo is a cosy, fun place. The menu is mainly tapas, and most people go for the seven-course tapas menu (€25, wine included), but there are a few more substantial dishes. Nice touches include the home-baked bread and cakes.
oMam i TecaCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 441 33 35; Carrer de la Lluna 4; mains €9-12; h1-4pm & 8pm-midnight Mon, Wed-Fri & Sun, 8pm-midnight Sat; mSant Antoni)
A tiny place with half a dozen tables, Mam i Teca is as much a lifestyle choice as a restaurant. Locals drop in and hang at the bar, and diners are treated to Catalan dishes made with locally sourced products and that adhere to Slow Food principles (such as cod fried in olive oil with garlic and red pepper, or pork ribs with chickpeas).
oBar PinotxoTAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.pinotxobar.com; Mercat de la Boqueria; mains €8-17; h6am-4pm Mon-Sat; mLiceu)
Bar Pinotxo is arguably La Boqueria's, and even Barcelona's, best tapas bar. It sits among the half-dozen or so informal eateries within the market, and the popular owner, Juanito, might serve up chickpeas with pine nuts and raisins, a soft mix of potato and spinach sprinkled with salt, soft baby squid with cannellini beans, or a quivering cube of caramel-sweet pork belly.
SuculentCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 443 65 79; www.suculent.com; Rambla del Raval 43; mains €13-21; h1-4pm & 8.30-11.30pm Wed-Sun; mLiceu)
Michelin-starred chef Carles Abellan adds to his stable with this old-style bistro, which showcases the best of Catalan cuisine. From the cod brandade to the oxtail stew with truffled sweet potato, only the best ingredients are used. Be warned that the prices can mount up a bit, but this is a great place to sample regional highlights.
El QuimTAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 301 98 10; www.elquimdelaboqueria.com; Mercat de la Boqueria; h7am-4pm Tue-Thu, to 5pm Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
This classic counter bar in the Mercat de la Boqueria is ideal for trying traditional Catalan dishes such as fried eggs with baby squid (the house speciality) or escalivada (smoky grilled vegetables). Daily specials are prepared using whatever is in season, and might include artichoke chips or sautéed wild mushrooms.
La Ribera
If you’d mentioned El Born (El Borne in Spanish) in the early 1990s, you wouldn’t have raised much interest. Now the area is peppered with bars, dance dives, groovy designer stores and restaurants. You'll find avant-garde chefs playing with fusion and technology cheek by jowl with no-nonsense matrons serving up traditional comfort food, and you'll also find an increasing number of multicultural restaurants.
ParadisoSMOKERY€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %639 310671; www.rooftopsmokehouse.com; Carrer de Rera Palau 4; mains €8; hcocktail bar 7pm-2am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, pastrami bar noon-2am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mBarceloneta)
A kind of Narnia-in-reverse, Paradiso is fronted with a snowy-white space, not much bigger than a wardrobe, and in itself reason enough to linger, with pastrami sandwiches, smoked duck and other home-cured delights from the Rooftop Smokehouse team, best known for their food trucks.
BormuthTAPAS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 21 86; Carrer del Rec 31; tapas from €4; h1pm-midnight; W; mJaume I)
Opened on the pedestrian Carrer del Rec in 2013, Bormuth has tapped into the vogue for old-school tapas with modern-day service and decor, and serves all the old favourites – patatas bravas, ensaladilla (Russian salad) and tortilla – along with some less predictable and superbly prepared numbers (try the chargrilled red pepper with black pudding).
Euskal EtxeaTAPAS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 21 85; Placeta de Montcada 1; tapas €1.95; h10am-12.30am Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; mJaume I)
Barcelona has plenty of Basque and pseudo-Basque eateries, but this is the real deal. It captures the feel of San Sebastián better than many of its newer competitors. Choose your pintxos (Basque tapas piled on slices of bread), sip txacolí (Basque white wine), and keep the toothpicks so the staff can count them up and work out your bill.
oEl AtrilINTERNATIONAL€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 12 20; www.atrilbarcelona.com; Carrer dels Carders 23; mains €11-15; hnoon-midnight Mon-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat, 11.30am-11.30pm Sun; W; mJaume I)
Aussie owner Brenden is influenced by culinary flavours from all over the globe, so while you'll see plenty of tapas (the patatas bravas are recommended for their homemade sauce), you'll also find kangaroo fillet, salmon and date rolls with mascarpone, chargrilled turkey with fried yucca, and plenty more.
oCasa DelfínCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 50 88; www.tallerdetapas.com; Passeig del Born 36; mains €10-15; h8am-midnight Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; W; mBarceloneta)
One of Barcelona's culinary delights, Casa Delfín is everything you dream of when you think of Catalan (and Mediterranean) cooking. Start with the tangy and sweet calçots (a cross between a leek and an onion; February and March only) or salt-strewn padron peppers, moving on to grilled sardines speckled with parsley, then tackle the meaty monkfish roasted in white wine and garlic.
Cal PepTAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 79 61; www.calpep.com; Plaça de les Olles 8; mains €13-20; h7.30-11.30pm Mon, 1-3.45pm & 7.30-11.30pm Tue-Sat, closed last 3 weeks Aug; mBarceloneta)
It’s getting a foot in the door of this legendary fish restaurant that’s the problem – there can be queues out into the square. And if you want one of the five tables out the back, you’ll need to call ahead. Most people are happy elbowing their way to the bar for some of the tastiest seafood tapas in town.
Barceloneta & the Waterfront
For good food and atmosphere, head to La Barceloneta, the lanes of which bristle with everything from good-natured, noisy tapas bars to upmarket seafood restaurants. Almost all options shut on Sunday and Monday evenings. The Port Olímpic marina is lined with restaurants and tapas bars, popular in spring and summer but mostly underwhelming. A more upmarket series of places huddles at the northeast end of Platja de la Barceloneta – it’s hard to beat the sea and palm-tree backdrop. Otherwise, the search for culinary curios will take you behind the scenes in Poblenou, which has a growing number of appealing options.
oLa Cova FumadaTAPAS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 221 40 61; Carrer del Baluard 56; tapas €4-8; h9am-3.20pm Mon-Wed, 9am-3.20pm & 6-8.15pm Thu & Fri, 9am-1pm Sat; mBarceloneta)
There's no sign and the setting is decidedly downmarket, but this tiny, buzzing family-run tapas spot always packs in a crowd. The secret? Mouthwatering pulpo (octopus), calamar, sardinias and 15 or so other small plates cooked to perfection in the small open kitchen. The bombas (potato croquettes served with alioli) and grilled carxofes (artichokes) are good, but everything is amazingly fresh.
Can DendêAMERICAN€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %646 325551; Carrer de la Ciutat de Granada 44; mains €6-11; h8.30am-5pm Mon-Fri, from 10.30am Sat & Sun; mLlacuna)
An eclectic crowd gathers at this bright, bohemian Brazilian-run eatery in Poblenou. Anytime brunch is the culinary star here, and you can tuck into eggs Benedict with smoked salmon, fluffy pancakes or pulled pork sandwiches while watching the cooks in action and listening to the mix of sounds at play – Latin tropicalia, American grooves, plus the various languages spoken at neighbouring tables.
oCan RecasensCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 300 81 23; Rambla del Poblenou 102; mains €7-15; h9pm-1am Mon-Fri & 1-4pm & 9pm-1am Sat; mPoblenou)
One of Poblenou's most romantic settings, Can Recasens hides a warren of warmly lit rooms full of oil paintings, flickering candles, fairy lights and baskets of fruit. The food is outstanding, with a mix of salads, fondues, smoked meats, cheeses, and open-faced sandwiches piled high with delicacies like wild mushrooms and brie, escalivada (grilled vegetables) and gruyere, and spicy chorizo.
El 58TAPAS€
(Le cinquante huit; GOOGLE MAP ; Rambla del Poblenou 58; sharing plates €4-11; h1.30pm-midnight Tue-Sat; mLlacuna)
This French-Catalan eatery serves imaginative, beautifully prepared tapas dishes that earn rave reviews from both locals and expats. Solo diners can grab a seat at the marble-topped front bar and get dining tips from the friendly multilingual baristas. The back dining room with its exposed brick walls, industrial light fixtures and curious artworks is a lively place to linger over a long meal.
KaikuSEAFOOD€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 221 90 82; www.restaurantkaiku.cat; Plaça del Mar 1; mains for 2 €28-36; h1-3.30pm Tue-Sun; mBarceloneta)
Overlooking the waterfront at the south end of Barceloneta, Kaiku has a solid reputation for its creative seafood plates. Mouth-watering ingredients are sourced from the nearby fish market, and artfully prepared in dishes such as crayfish with mint, swordfish carpaccio with avocado and sundried tomatoes, chillli-smeared tuna with green apples and mushrooms, and the outstanding rice dishes for two.
La Sagrada Família & L'Eixample
Most of this huge area's many varied and enticing restaurants are concentrated in the Quadrat d’Or between Carrer de Pau Claris and Carrer de Muntaner, Avinguda Diagonal and Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes. There is no shortage of perfectly acceptable bar-restaurants (often with street-side tables) that offer reasonable menús del día (daily set menus) and stock-standard dishes a la carta. In among these places are sprinkled real finds, offering both local and international cuisine.
CopaseticCAFE€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 532 76 66; www.copaseticbarcelona.com; Carrer de la Diputació 55; mains €8-12; h10.30am-midnight Tue & Wed, to 1am Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat, to 5.30pm Sun; Wv; mRocafort)
A fun and friendly cafe, decked out with retro furniture. The menu holds plenty for everyone, whether your thing is eggs Benedict, wild-berry tartlets or a juicy fat burger. There are lots of vegetarian, gluten-free and organic options, and superb (and reasonably priced) brunches on weekends. Wednesday night is ladies' night, with cheap cocktails. Lunch menús (Tuesday to Friday) cost between €9.50 and €11.
oTapas 24TAPAS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 488 09 77; www.carlesabellan.com; Carrer de la Diputació 269; tapas €4-9; h9am-midnight; W; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Carles Abellan, master of the now-defunct Comerç 24 in La Ribera, runs this basement tapas haven known for its gourmet versions of old faves. Specials include the bikini (toasted ham and cheese sandwich – here the ham is cured and the truffle makes all the difference) and a thick black arròs negre de sípia (squid-ink black rice).
oCerveseria CatalanaTAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 216 03 68; Carrer de Mallorca 236; tapas €4-11; h8am-1.30am Mon-Fri, 9am-1.30am Sat & Sun; mPasseig de Gràcia)
The ‘Catalan Brewery’ is good for breakfast, lunch and dinner. Come for your morning coffee and croissant, or enjoy the abundance of tapas and montaditos (canapés) at lunch. You can sit at the bar, on the pavement terrace or in the restaurant at the back. The variety of hot tapas, salads and other snacks draws a well-dressed crowd of locals and outsiders.
Chicha LimonáMEDITERRANEAN, PIZZERIA€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 277 64 03; www.chichalimona.com; Passeig de Sant Joan 80; mains €10-16; h8.30am-1am Tue-Thu, 8.30am-2am Fri, 9.30am-2am Sat, 9.30am-5pm Sun; W; mTetuan)
Passeig de Sant Joan has become the newest haunt for the hussar-moustached, turned-up-cigarette-pants brigade, and bright, bustling Chicha Limoná has provided them with somewhere great to eat. Grilled octopus with quince jelly, pork with apple compote and pear tatin with crème anglaise are among the oft-changing dishes (set menu €12.90), along with homemade pizzas.
Entrepanes DíazSANDWICHES€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 415 75 82; Carrer de Pau Claris 189; sandwiches €6-8, salads €12; h11am-midnight Tue-Sat, 11am-6pm Sun; mDiagonal)
A new concept in upmarket gourmet sandwiches, from roast beef to suckling pig, along with sharing plates of Spanish specialities such as sea urchins and prawn fritters, in a sparkling old-style bar. The policy of only hiring experienced waiters over 50 lends a certain gravitas to the operation and some especially charming service.
Cata 1.81TAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 323 68 18; www.cata181.com; Carrer de València 181; tapas €5.50-8; h6pm-midnight Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
A beautifully designed venue (with lots of small lights, some trapped in birdcages), this is the place to come for fine wines and dainty gourmet dishes like raviolis amb bacallà (salt-cod dumplings) or truita de patates i tòfona negre (thick potato tortilla with a delicate trace of black truffle). The best idea is to choose from one of several tasting-menu options.
oCinc SentitsINTERNATIONAL€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 323 94 90; www.cincsentits.com; Carrer d’Aribau 58; tasting menus €100/120; h1.30-3pm & 8.30-10pm Tue-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Enter the realm of the ‘Five Senses’ to indulge in a jaw-dropping tasting menu consisting of a series of small, experimental dishes (there is no à la carte, although dishes can be tweaked to suit diners' requests). There is a lunch menú for €55.
Casa CalvetCATALAN€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 412 40 12; www.casacalvet.es; Carrer de Casp 48; mains €28-31; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm Mon-Sat; mUrquinaona)
An early Gaudí masterpiece loaded with his trademark curvy features houses a swish restaurant (just to the right of the building’s main entrance). Dress up and ask for an intimate taula cabina (wooden booth). You could opt for scallops and razor clams with pesto and buckwheat, or venison with juniper and porcini sauce.
oDisfrutarMODERN EUROPEAN€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 348 68 96; www.en.disfrutarbarcelona.com; Carrer de Vilarroel 163; tasting menus €75/105/135; h1-4pm & 8-11pm Tue-Sat; mHospital Clínic)
In its first few months of life, Disfrutar rose stratospherically to become the city's finest restaurant – book now while it's still possible to get a table. Run by alumni of Ferran Adrià's game-changing El Bulli restaurant, it operates along similar lines.
Gràcia & Park Güell
Spread across this busy quarter are all sorts of enticing options, from simple tapas bars to top-class seafood. Gràcia is loaded with Middle Eastern and other ethnic restaurants, many of which are upbeat and good value. Several classic Catalan taverns tick along nicely with a strong local following. There’s little of interest, however, around Park Güell.
Chivuo'sSANDWICHES€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 218 51 34; www.chivuos.com; Carrer del Torrent de l'Olla 175; sandwiches €7-9; h1-5pm & 7pm-midnight Mon-Fri, 6pm-midnight Sat; mLesseps, Fontana)
Satisfying grilled sandwiches and delicious craft brews make a fine pair at this buzzing little snack den in Gràcia. A mostly local crowd comes for the slow-roasted pork, tuna melts, bacon-covered burgers and 'philli cheese steaks' – best ordered with fritas (chips). The rotating selection of eight craft brews includes mostly Catalan and Spanish brews, including excellent ales from Barcelona-based Edge Brewing.
La Panxa del BisbeTAPAS€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 213 70 49; Carrer del Torrent de les Flors 156; tapas €8-14, tasting menus from €30; h1.30-3.30pm & 8.30pm-midnight Tue-Sat; mJoanic)
With low lighting and an artfully minimalist interior, the ‘Bishop’s Belly’ serves up creative tapas that earn high praise from the mostly local crowd. Feast on grilled razor clams, foie gras with pine nuts and pumpkin, tender morsels of tuna tataki or picanya (grilled rump steak) served with chips and Béarnaise sauce.
El GlopCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 213 70 58; www.elglop.com; Carrer de Sant Lluís 24; mains €7-20; h1pm-midnight Mon-Fri, from noon Sat & Sun; mJoanic)
This raucous eatery is decked out in country Catalan fashion, with gingham tablecloths and no-nonsense, slap-up meals. The secret is hearty serves of simple dishes, such as cordero a la brasa (grilled lamb), paella de pescado y marisco (fish and seafood paella) and appetisers like berenjenas rellenas (stuffed aubergines) or calçots (spring onions) in winter.
Cal BoterCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 458 84 62; www.restaurantcalboter.com; Carrer de Tordera 62; mains €8-15; h1-4pm & 9pm-midnight Tue-Sat, 1-4pm Sun & Mon; mJoanic)
Families and noisy groups of pals are drawn to this classic eatery for cargols a la llauna (snails sautéed in a tin dish), filet de bou amb salsa de foie (a thick clump of tender beef drowned in an orange and foie gras sauce), and other Catalan specialities.
Con GraciaFUSION€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 238 02 01; www.congracia.es; Carrer de Martínez de la Rosa 8; set menu €65, with wine pairing €95; h7-11pm Tue-Sat; mDiagonal)
This teeny hideaway (seating about 20 in total) is a hive of originality, producing delicately balanced Mediterranean cuisine with Asian touches. On offer is a regularly changing surprise tasting menu or the set ‘traditional’ one, with dishes such as squid stuffed with jamón ibérico and black truffle, and juicy black angus steak. Book ahead.
Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta
Some of the grandest kitchens in the city are scattered across La Zona Alta, from Tibidabo across Sant Gervasi (as far down as Avinguda Diagonal, west of Gràcia) to Pedralbes. Plenty of places of all cuisines and qualities abound, often tucked away in quiet, unassuming residential streets far from anything of interest to tourists. Eating in La Zona Alta can be both a culinary and, with a couple of notable exceptions, a genuinely local experience.
ComaxurrosCHURROS€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 417 94 05; Carrer de Muntaner 562; churros from €2; h4.30-8.30pm Tue, 9am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Wed-Sun; dFGC El Putxet)
At this eye-catching little cafe, brought to you by Barcelona's famous pastelería Canals, the humble churro receives a dramatic makeover: it's fried in olive oil to crispy (healthier) perfection and served with unique fillings and toppings (pistachio, strawberry sauce, dark chocolate). You'll even find savoury churros – with cheese, mushrooms and jamón ibérico (Iberian ham), among other delicacies.
Bar TomàsTAPAS€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 203 10 77; Carrer Major de Sarrià 49; tapas €2.50-5.50; hnoon-4pm & 6-10pm Mon-Sat; dFGC Sarrià)
Many barcelonins have long claimed that Bar Tomàs is by far the best place in the city for patatas bravas (potato chunks in a slightly spicy tomato sauce). Despite the fluorescent lights and friendly but gruff service, folks from all walks of life pile in, particularly for lunch on weekends.
La MolinaCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 417 11 24; Passeig de Sant Gervasi 65; mains €11-17; h1pm-12.30am Mon-Fri, 11am-5pm Sat & Sun; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
La Molina looks like a typical tapas bar at first glance – pavement tables, nondescript bar in front – but head to the back room and you'll discover one of the great unsung Catalan restaurants in the neighbourhood.
ABaCCATALAN€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 66 00; www.abacbarcelona.com; Avinguda del Tibidabo 1; mains €45-75, tasting menus €135-165; h1.30-4pm & 8.30-11pm Tue-Sat; dFGC Av Tibidabo)
Led by celebrated chef Jordi Cruz, ABaC offers one of Barcelona's most memorable dining experiences (and also one of its priciest). Expect creative, mouth-watering perfection in dishes like sea urchin curry with lime, guinea fowl with Norway lobster, and roasted sea bass with artichokes and oysters.
Via VenetoCATALAN€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 200 72 44; www.viavenetorestaurant.com; Carrer de Ganduxer 10; mains €31-43, tasting menus €85-125; h1-3.30pm Mon-Fri, 1-3.30pm & 8-11.30pm Mon-Sat, closed Aug; dFGC La Bonanova)
Dalí used to regularly waltz into this high-society eatery after it opened in 1967. The vaguely art-deco setting (note the oval mirrors), orange-rose tablecloths, leather chairs and fine cutlery may cater to more conservative souls, but the painter was here for the kitchen exploits.
Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni
Montjuïc has limited eating options, for the obvious reason that it is mostly parks and gardens. In Poble Sec, however, you’ll turn up all sorts of creative eating and drinking spots, from historic taverns offering Catalan classics to a handful of smart, new-wave eateries, while equally creative Sant Antoni is the place for new cafe openings.
EscribàDESSERTS€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 454 75 35; www.escriba.es; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 546; pastries from €2; h8.30am-3pm & 5-9.30pm Mon-Fri, 8.30am-8.30pm Sat & Sun; mUrgell)
Antoni Escribà carries forward a family tradition (since 1906) of melting barcelonins’ hearts with remarkable pastries and criminal chocolate creations. Try the Easter bunyols de xocolata (little round pastry balls filled with chocolate cream). Escribà has another branch in a Modernista setting at La Rambla.
oPalo CortaoTAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 188 90 67; www.palocortao.es; Carrer de Nou de la Rambla 14; mains €10-15; h8pm-1am Tue-Sun & 1-5pm Sat & Sun; mParal·lel)
Palo Cortao has a solid reputation for its beautifully executed seafood and meat dishes, served at fair prices. Highlights include octopus with white bean hummus, skirt steak with foie armagnac, and tuna tataki tempura. You can order half sizes of all plates – which will allow you to try more dishes.
oQuimet i QuimetTAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 442 31 42; Carrer del Poeta Cabanyes 25; tapas €4-10, montaditos around €3; hnoon-4pm & 7-10.30pm Mon-Fri, noon-4pm Sat; mParal·lel)
Quimet i Quimet is a family-run business that has been passed down from generation to generation. There’s barely space to swing a calamar in this bottle-lined, standing-room-only place, but it is a treat for the palate, with montaditos (tapas on a slice of bread) made to order.
Casa XicaFUSION€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 600 58 58; Carrer de la França Xica 20; sharing plates €9-15; h1.30-3pm & 8.30-11.30pm Mon-Sat; mPoble Sec)
On the parlour floor of an old house, Casa Xica is a casual, but artfully designed space that fuses elements of the Far East with fresh Catalan ingredients (owners Marc and Raquel lived and travelled in Asia).
TonkaINTERNATIONAL€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 127 05 44; www.tonkabar.com; Carrer del Marquès de Campo Sagrado 27; h5pm-midnight Tue-Fri, from 10am Sat & Sun; Wv; mSant Antoni, Poble Sec)
It's hard not to fall for this charming neighbourhood eatery. Fresh-cut flowers in vermouth jars, groovy music and a spray of colourful art prints on the wall set the stage for dining on delicious organic and veg-friendly dishes with Asian and Latin American accents.
Bodega 1900TAPAS€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 325 26 59; www.bodega1900.com; Carrer de Tamarit 91; tapas €5-14; hnoon-4pm & 7-11.30pm; mSant Antoni)
The latest venture from the world-famous Adrià brothers, Bodega 1900 mimics an old-school tapas and vermouth bar, but this is no ordinary spit-and-sawdust joint serving patatas bravas and tortilla. Witness, for example, the mollete de calamars, probably the best squid sandwich in the world, hot from the pan and served with chipotle mayonnaise, kimchi and lemon zest; or the 'spherified' false olives.
oTicketsMODERN SPANISH€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %606 225545; www.ticketsbar.es; Avinguda del Paral·lel 164; tapas €5-27; h6.30-10.30pm Tue-Fri, 1-3pm & 7-10.30pm Sat, closed Aug; mParal·lel)
This is, literally, one of the sizzling tickets in the restaurant world, a tapas bar opened by Ferran Adrià, of the legendary El Bulli, and his brother Albert. And unlike El Bulli, it's an affordable venture – if you can book a table, that is: you can only book online, and two months in advance (or call for last-minute cancellations).
6Drinking & Nightlife
Barcelona is a nightlife-lovers' town, with an enticing spread of candlelit wine bars, old-school taverns, stylish lounges and kaleidoscopic nightclubs where the party continues until daybreak. For something a little more sedate, the city's atmospheric cafes and teahouses make a fine retreat when the skies turn grey.
La Rambla & Barri Gòtic
oGingerCOCKTAIL BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 53 09; www.ginger.cat; Carrer de Palma de Sant Just 1; h7.30pm-2.30am Tue-Thu, 7.30pm-3am Fri & Sat; mJaume I)
Tucked away just off peaceful Plaça de Sant Just, Ginger is an art deco–style multilevel drinking den with low lighting, finely crafted cocktails and good ambient sounds (provided by vinyl-spinning DJs some nights). It's a mellow spot that's great for sipping wine and sampling from the gourmet tapas menu.
L'AscensorBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 318 53 47; Carrer de la Bellafila 3; h6pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
Named after the lift (elevator) doors that serve as the front door, this elegant drinking den with its vaulted brick ceilings, vintage mirrors and marble-topped bar gathers a faithful crowd that comes for old-fashioned cocktails and lively conversation against a soundtrack of up-tempo jazz and funk.
OcañaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 676 48 14; www.ocana.cat; Plaça Reial 13; hnoon-2.30am Mon-Fri, 11am-2.30am Sat & Sun; W; mLiceu)
Named after a flamboyant artist who once lived on Plaça Reial, Ocaña is a beautifully designed space with chandeliers and plush furnishings. Have a seat on the terrace and watch the passing people parade, or head downstairs to the Moorish-inspired Apotheke bar or the chic lounge a few steps away, where DJs spin for a mix of beauties and bohemians on weekend nights.
Sor RitaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 176 62 66; www.sorritabar.es; Carrer de la Mercè 27; h7pm-3am Sun-Thu, to 3.30am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
A lover of all things kitsch, Sor Rita is pure eye candy, from its leopard-print wallpaper to its high-heel-festooned ceiling and deliciously irreverent decorations inspired by the films of Almodóvar. It's a fun and festive scene, with special-event nights including tarot readings on Mondays, €5 all-you-can-eat snack buffets on Tuesdays, karaoke or cabaret on Wednesdays and gin specials on Thursdays.
PolaroidBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 186 66 69; www.polaroidbar.es; Carrer dels Còdols 29; h7pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mDrassanes)
For a dash of 1980s nostalgia, Polaroid is a blast from the past, with its wall-mounted VHS tapes, old film posters, comic-book-covered tables, action-figure displays and other kitschy decor. Not surprisingly, it draws a fun, unpretentious crowd who come for cheap cañas (draught beer), mojitos and free popcorn.
La CervetecaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.lacerveteca.com; Carrer d’en Gignàs 25; h6pm-midnight Tue-Fri, noon-3.30pm & 6pm-midnight Sat, noon-3.30pm Sun; mJaume I)
An unmissable stop for beer lovers, La Cerveteca serves an impressive variety of global craft brews. In addition to scores of bottled beers, there's a frequent rotation of what's on draught. Cheeses, jamón ibérico and other charcuterie selections are on hand, including cecina (cured horse meat).
Marula CaféBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 318 76 90; www.marulacafe.com; Carrer dels Escudellers 49; h11pm-6am Wed-Sun; mLiceu)
A fantastic find in the heart of the Barri Gòtic, Marula will transport you to the 1970s and the best in funk and soul. James Brown fans will think they’ve died and gone to heaven. It’s not, however, a monothematic place and DJs slip in other tunes, from breakbeat to house. Samba and other Brazilian dance sounds also penetrate here.
Cafè de l’ÒperaCAFE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 317 75 85; www.cafeoperabcn.com; La Rambla 74; h8.30am-2.30am; W; mLiceu)
Opposite the Gran Teatre del Liceu is La Rambla’s most intriguing cafe. Operating since 1929, it is pleasant enough for an early evening libation or coffee and croissants. Head upstairs for an elevated seat above the busy boulevard. Can you be tempted by the cafè de l’Òpera (coffee with chocolate mousse)?
BEST CAFES

Some of Barcelona’s most atmospheric cafes lie hidden in the cobbled lanes of the Ciutat Vella. A round-up of our favourite spots for a pick-me-up:
SalterioCAFE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call 4; h11am-midnight, to 1am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
A wonderfully photogenic candlelit spot tucked down a tiny lane in El Call, Salterio serves Turkish coffee, authentic mint teas and snacks amid stone walls, incense and ambient Middle Eastern music. If hunger strikes, try the sardo (grilled flat-bread covered with pesto, cheese or other toppings).
CaelumCAFE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 302 69 93; www.caelumbarcelona.com; Carrer de la Palla 8; h10.30am-8.30pm Mon-Thu, to 11pm Fri & Sat, to 9pm Sun; mLiceu)
Centuries of heavenly gastronomic tradition from across Spain are concentrated in this exquisite medieval space in the heart of the city. The upstairs cafe is a dainty setting for decadent cakes and pastries, while descending into the underground chamber with its stone walls and flickering candles is like stepping into the Middle Ages.
Granja M ViaderCAFE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 318 34 86; www.granjaviader.cat; Carrer d’en Xuclà 6; h9am-1.30pm & 5-9pm Mon-Sat; mLiceu)
For more than a century, people have flocked down this alley to get to the cups of homemade hot chocolate and whipped cream (ask for a suís) ladled out in this classic Catalan-style milk-bar-cum-deli. The Viader clan invented Cacaolat, a forerunner of kids’ powdered-chocolate beverages. The interior here is delightfully vintage and the atmosphere always upbeat.
La NenaCAFE€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 285 14 76; www.chocolaterialanena.com; Carrer de Ramon y Cajal 36; desserts from €4.50; h9am-10pm; c; mFontana)
A French team has created this delightfully chaotic space for indulging in cups of suïssos (rich hot chocolate) served with a plate of heavy homemade whipped cream and melindros (spongy sweet biscuits), fine desserts and even a few savoury dishes (including crêpes). The place is strewn with books, and you can play with the board games on the shelves.
El Raval
oLa ConfiteríaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Sant Pau 128; h7.30pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, 6pm-3.30am Fri, 5pm-3.30am Sat, 12.45pm-2.45am Sun; mParal·lel)
This is a trip into the 19th century. Until the 1980s it was a confectioner’s shop, and although the original cabinets are now lined with booze, the look of the place barely changed with its conversion into a laid-back bar. A quiet enough spot for a house vermut (€3; add your own soda) in the early evening.
Casa AlmirallBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.casaalmirall.com; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 33; h6pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, 6.30pm-3am Fri, noon-3am Sat, noon-12.30am Sun; mUniversitat)
In business since the 1860s, this unchanged corner bar is dark and intriguing, with Modernista decor and a mixed clientele. There are some great original pieces in here, such as the marble counter, and the cast-iron statue of the muse of the Universal Exposition, held in Barcelona in 1888.
MoogCLUB
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.masimas.com/moog; Carrer de l’Arc del Teatre 3; hmidnight-5am Mon-Thu & Sun, to 6am Fri & Sat; mDrassanes)
This fun and minuscule club is a standing favourite with the downtown crowd. In the main dance area, DJs dish out house, techno and electro, while upstairs you can groove to a nice blend of indie and occasional classic-pop throwbacks. Admission is €5.
Bar PastísBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.barpastis.com; Carrer de Santa Mònica 4; h7.30pm-2am; mDrassanes)
A French cabaret theme (with lots of Piaf in the background) dominates this tiny, cluttered classic. It’s been going, on and off, since the end of WWII. You’ll need to be in here before 9pm to have any hope of sitting, getting near the bar or anything much else. On some nights it features live acts, usually performing French chansons.
London BarBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer Nou de la Rambla 34-36; h6pm-3am Mon-Thu & Sun, 6pm-3.30am Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
Open since 1909, this Modernista bar started as a hang-out for circus hands and was later frequented by the likes of Picasso, Miró and Hemingway. Today it fills to the brim with punters at the long front bar and rickety old tables. On occasion you can attend concerts at the small stage right up the back.
BoadasCOCKTAIL BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.boadascocktails.com; Carrer dels Tallers 1; hnoon-2am Mon-Thu, noon-3am Fri & Sat; mCatalunya)
One of the city’s oldest cocktail bars, Boadas is famed for its daiquiris. Bow-tied waiters have been serving up unique, drinkable creations since Miguel Boadas opened it in 1933 – in fact Miró and Hemingway both drank here. Miguel was born in Havana, where he was the first barman at the immortal La Floridita.
THE GREEN FAIRY

Bar Marsella ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 442 72 63; Carrer de Sant Pau 65; h10pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, 10pm-3am Fri & Sat; mLiceu) has been in business since 1820, and has served the likes of Hemingway, who was known to slump here over an absenta (absinthe). The bar still specialises in absinthe, a drink to be treated with respect. Your glass comes with a lump of sugar, a fork and a little bottle of mineral water. Hold the sugar on the fork, over your glass, and drip the water onto the sugar so that it dissolves into the absinthe, which turns yellow. The result should give you a warm glow.
La Ribera
GuzzoCOCKTAIL BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 667 00 36; www.guzzo.es; Plaça Comercial 10; h6pm-3am Tue-Thu, to 3.30am Fri & Sat, noon-3am Sun; W; mBarceloneta)
This swish but relaxed cocktail bar is run by much-loved Barcelona DJ Fred Guzzo, who is often to be found at the decks, spinning his delicious selection of funk, soul and rare groove. You'll also find frequent live-music acts of consistently decent quality, and a funky atmosphere at almost any time of day.
RubíBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %647 773707; Carrer dels Banys Vells 6; h7.30pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mJaume I)
With its boudoir lighting and cheap mojitos, Rubí is where the Born's cognoscenti head for a nightcap – or several. It's a narrow, cosy space – push through to the back where you might just get one of the coveted tables, with superior bar food, from Vietnamese rolls to more traditional selections of cheese and ham.
El Born BarBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 53 33; Passeig del Born 26; h10am-2am Mon-Sat, noon-1.30am Sun; W; mJaume I)
El Born Bar effortlessly attracts everyone from cool thirty-somethings from all over town to locals who pass judgment on Passeig del Born’s passing parade. Its staying power depends on a good selection of beers, spirits, and empanadas and other snacks.
MudanzasBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 11 37; Carrer de la Vidrieria 15; h10am-2am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
This was one of the first bars to get things into gear in El Born and it still attracts a faithful crowd. With its chequered floor and marble-topped tables, it’s an attractive, lively place for a beer and perhaps a sandwich or a tapa. It also has a nice line in rum and malt whisky.
Juanra FalcesCOCKTAIL BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 10 27; Carrer del Rec 24; h8pm-3am Tue-Sat, 10pm-3am Sun & Mon; mJaume I)
Transport yourself to a Humphrey Bogart movie in this narrow little bar, formerly (and still, at least among the locals) known as Gimlet. White-jacketed bar staff with all the appropriate aplomb will whip you up a gimlet or any other classic cocktail (around €10) that your heart desires.
La Vinya del SenyorWINE BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 33 79; www.lavinyadelsenyor.com; Plaça de Santa Maria del Mar 5; hnoon-1am Mon-Thu, noon-2am Fri & Sat, noon-midnight Sun; W; mJaume I)
Relax on the terrassa, which lies in the shadow of the Basílica de Santa Maria del Mar, or crowd inside at the tiny bar. The wine list is as long as War and Peace and there’s a table upstairs for those who opt to sample by the bottle rather than the glass.
CAVA BARS

Cava bars tend to be more about the festive ambience than the actual drinking of cava, a sparkling white or rosé, most of which is produced in Catalonia’s Penedès region. The most famous cava bars are El Xampanyet ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 70 03; Carrer de Montcada 22; hnoon-4pm & 7-11pm Tue-Sat, noon-4pm Sun; mJaume I) in La Ribera and Can Paixano in Barceloneta.
Barceloneta & the Waterfront
AbsentaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.absentabar.es; Carrer de Sant Carles 36; h7pm-1am Tue & Wed, from 11am Thu-Mon; mBarceloneta)
Decorated with old paintings, vintage lamps and curious sculpture (including a dangling butterfly woman and face-painted TVs), this whimsical and creative drinking den takes its liquor seriously. Stop in for the house-made vermouth or for more bite try one of the many absinthes on hand. Just go easy: with an alcohol content of 50% to 90%, these spirits have kick!
Can PaixanoWINE BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 08 39; Carrer de la Reina Cristina 7; h9am-10.30pm Mon-Sat; mBarceloneta)
This lofty old champagne bar (also called La Xampanyeria) has long been run on a winning formula. The standard poison is bubbly rosé in elegant little glasses, combined with bite-sized bocadillos (filled rolls) and tapas (€3 to €7). Note that this place is usually packed to the rafters, and elbowing your way to the bar can be a titanic struggle.
BlackLabMICROBREWERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 221 83 60; www.blacklab.es; Plaça Pau Vila 1; hnoon-1.30am; mBarceloneta)
Inside the historic Palau de Mar, BlackLab was Barcelona's first brewhouse to open way back in 2014. With 20 taps (including 18 housemade brews, including saisons, double IPAs and dry stouts), it's an impressive operation, and the brewmasters are constantly experimenting with new flavours.
La Cervecita Nuestra de Cada DíaBAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Llull 184; h5.30-9.30pm Sun & Mon, 11.30am-2pm & 5.30-9.30pm Tue-Sat; mLlacuna)
Equal parts beer shop and craft brew bar, La Cervicita has a changing selection of unique beers from around Europe and the USA. You might stumble across a Catalan sour fruit beer, a rare English stout, a potent Belgian triple ale or half a dozen other draughts on hand – plus many more varieties by the bottle.
Espai JoliuCAFE
( GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer Badajoz 95; h9am-7pm Mon-Fri; W; mLlacuna)
Further proof that Poblenou is fast becoming the Brooklyn of Barcelona are places like Espai Joliu, a charming little space with art mags, handmade stationery and ceramics sold up front and a peaceful cafe (blonde wood tables, melodic indie rock) tucked up the steps at the back.
La Sagrada Família & L'Eixample
oMonvínicWINE BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 272 61 87; www.monvinic.com; Carrer de la Diputació 249; h1-11pm Tue-Fri, 7-11pm Mon & Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Apparently considered unmissable by El Bulli's sommelier, Monvínic is an ode, a rhapsody even, to wine loving. The interactive wine list sits on the bar for you to browse, on a digital tablet similar to an iPad, and boasts more than 3000 varieties.
oDry MartiniBAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 217 50 80; www.drymartiniorg.com; Carrer d’Aribau 162-166; h1pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, 6pm-3am Fri & Sat, 7pm-2.30am Sun; mDiagonal)
Waiters with a discreetly knowing smile will attend to your cocktail needs and make uncannily good suggestions, but the house drink, taken at the bar or in one of the plush green leather banquettes, is a safe bet. The gin and tonic comes in an enormous mug-sized glass – one will take you most of the night.
Napar BCNBREWERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %606 546467; www.naparbcn.com; Carrer de la Diputació 223; hnoon-midnight Tue-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat, noon-5pm Sun; W; mUniversitat)
The latest bar to open as part of Barcelona's burgeoning craft-beer scene, Napar has 12 beers on tap, six of which are beers brewed on site, including a mix of IPA, pale ale and stout. There's also an accomplished list of bottled beers. It's a stunning space, with a gleaming steampunk aesthetic, and serves some excellent food should hunger strike.
MilanoCOCKTAIL BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 112 71 50; www.camparimilano.com; Ronda de la Universitat 35; hnoon-2.30am Mon-Sat, 6pm-2.30am Sun; mCatalunya)
An absolute gem of hidden Barcelona nightlife, Milano is a subterranean old-school cocktail bar with velvet banquettes and glass-fronted cabinets, presided over by white-jacketed waiters, and completely invisible from street level. Check the website for details on occasional live music.
Cafè del CentreCAFE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 488 11 01; Carrer de Girona 69; h10am-midnight Mon-Fri, noon-midnight Sat; W; mGirona)
Step back a century in this cafe that's been in business since 1873. The wooden bar extends down the right side as you enter, fronted by a slew of marble-topped tables and wooden chairs. It exudes an almost melancholy air by day but gets busy at night. Staff pride themselves on stocking 50 beers, and there is a lunchtime menú for €11.
Les Gens Que J'AimeBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 215 68 79; www.lesgensquejaime.com; Carrer de València 286; h6pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, 7pm-3am Fri & Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
This intimate basement relic of the 1960s follows a deceptively simple formula: chilled jazz music in the background, minimal lighting from an assortment of flea-market lamps and a cosy, cramped scattering of red-velvet-backed lounges around tiny dark tables.
Gràcia & Park Güell
RabipelaoCOCKTAIL BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 182 50 35; www.elrabipelao.com; Carrer del Torrent d'En Vidalet 22; h7pm-2am Mon-Sat, 1-4pm & 7pm-2am Sun; mJoanic, Fontana)
An anchor of Gràcia's nightlife, Rabipelao is a celebratory space with a spinning disco ball and DJs spinning driving salsa beats. Patrons aside, there's much to look at here: a silent film plays in one corner beyond the red velvety wallpaper-covered walls and there's a richly hued mural above the bar – not to mention the tropical cocktails (mojitos and caipirinhas) and snacks (arepas, ceviche).
ElephantaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 237 69 06; http://elephanta.cat; Carrer del Torrent d’en Vidalet 37; h6pm-1.30am Mon-Wed, to 2.30am Thu-Sat, 5-10pm Sun; mJoanic, Fontana)
This friendly and petite cocktail bar is a fine place to catch up with a friend. It has an old-fashioned vibe, with long plush green banquettes, art-lined walls and a five-seat bar topped with old vintage wooded stools.
VibliotecaWINE BAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 284 42 02; www.viblioteca.com; Carrer de Vallfogona 12; h6pm-1am Mon-Sat, 7pm-midnight Sun; mFontana)
If the smell of ripe cheese doesn't float your boat, this is not the place for you – a glass cabinet piled high with the stuff assaults your olfactory nerves as you walk into this small, white, cleverly designed space. The real speciality at Viblioteca, however, is wine, and you can choose from 150 mostly local labels, many of them available by the glass.
Musical MariaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 501 04 60; Carrer de Maria 5; h9pm-2.30am; W; mDiagonal)
Even the music hasn’t changed since this place got going in the late 1970s. Those longing for rock ‘n’ roll crowd into this animated bar, listen to old hits and knock back beers. Out the back there’s a pool table and the bar serves pretty much all the variants of the local Estrella Damm brew.
Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta
El MaravillasCOCKTAIL BAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 360 73 78; Plaça de la Concòrdia 15; hnoon-midnight Mon-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat; mMaria Cristina)
Overlooking the peaceful Plaça de la Concòrdia, El Maravillas feels like a secret hideaway – especially if you've just arrived from the crowded lanes of the ciutat vella (old city). The glittering bar has just a few tables, with outdoor seating on the square when the weather warms. Creative cocktails, good Spanish red wines and easy-drinking vermouths are the drinks of choice.
Dō BarBAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 209 18 88; www.do-bcn.com; Carrer de Santaló 30, entrance on l'Avenir; h7pm-1am Mon-Thu, 8pm-1am Fri & Sat; dFGC Muntaner)
This neighbourhood charmer has a warm and inviting interior, where friends gather over tall wooden tables to enjoy excellent gin and tonics, wines by the glass, craft beer and satisfying small plates (anchovies, mussels, tacos, charcuterie). On warm nights, arrive early for one of the terrace tables out the front.
MirablauBAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 418 58 79; www.mirablaubcn.com; Plaça del Doctor Andreu; h11am-4.30am Mon-Thu, 10am-4.30am Fri-Sun; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
Gaze out over the entire city from this privileged balcony restaurant on the way up to Tibidabo. Wander downstairs to join the folk in the tiny dance space. In summer you can step out on to the even smaller terrace for a breather.
BikiniCLUB
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 322 08 00; www.bikinibcn.com; Avinguda Diagonal 547; cover €10-25; hmidnight-6am Thu-Sat; g6, 7, 33, 34, 63, 67, 68, mEntença)
This old star of the Barcelona nightlife scene has been keeping the beat since the darkest days of Franco. Every possible kind of music gets a run, from Latin and Brazilian beats to 1980s disco, depending on the night and the space you choose.
Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni
oLa Caseta del MigdiaBAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; %617 956572; www.lacaseta.org; Mirador del Migdia; h8pm-1am Wed-Fri, from noon Sat & Sun, weekends only in winter; g150)
The effort of getting to what is, for all intents and purposes, a simple chiringuito (makeshift cafe-bar) is worth it. Stare out to sea over a beer or coffee by day. As sunset approaches the atmosphere changes, as lounge music (from samba to funk) wafts out over the hillside. Drinks aside, you can also order barbecue, fired up on the outdoor grills.
Bar CaldersBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 329 93 49; Carrer del Parlament 25; h5pm-2am Mon-Fri, 11am-2.30am Sat, 11am-midnight Sun; mSant Antoni)
It bills itself as a wine bar, but actually the wine selection at Bar Calders is its weak point. As an all-day cafe and tapas bar, however, it's unbeatable, with a few tables outside on a tiny pedestrian lane, and has become the favoured meeting point for the neighbourhood's boho element.
El RougeBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %666 251556; Carrer del Poeta Cabanyes 21; h11pm-2am Mon, 8pm-2am Tue & Thu, 10pm-3am Fri & Sat; W; mPoble Sec)
Decadence is the word that springs to mind in this bordello-red lounge-cocktail bar, with acid jazz, drum and bass and other sounds drifting along in the background. The walls are laden with heavy-framed paintings, dim lamps and mirrors, and no two chairs are alike. You can sometimes catch DJs, risqué poetry soirées, cabaret shows or even nights of tango dancing.
BacanalCAFE
( GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Sepúlveda 164; h9am-midnight Mon & Wed-Fri, 10am-2am Sat, 10am-8.30pm Sun; W; mUrgell)
This decidedly hip neighbourhood cafe invites lingering, with its spacious light-filled interior, artwork-lined walls and thoughtful touches (flowers on the tables) – never mind the concrete floors and columns. A mix of laptop users and chatterers stay fuelled on good coffees, smoothies, craft beers, wines, sandwiches and low-playing grooves.
Bar OlimpiaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %606 200800; Carrer d'Aldana 11; h7pm-1am Wed & Thu, to 2.30am Fri & Sat, 6-11pm Sun; mParal·lel)
This great little neighborhood bar is a little slice of Barcelona history. It was here (and on the surrounding block), where the popular Olimpia Theatre Circus once performed way back in the 1930s. Today the vaguely retro bar draws a diverse crowd, who come for house-made vermouth, snacks (like quesadillas, cheese plates, tuna tartare) and satisfying gin and tonics.

Shopping
La Rambla & Barri Gòtic
Torrons VicensFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 304 37 36; www.vicens.com; Carrer del Petritxol 15; h10am-8.30pm Mon-Sat, 11am-8pm Sun; mLiceu)
You can find the turrón (nougat) treat year-round at Torrons Vicens, which has been selling its signature sweets since 1775.
Sabater HermanosBEAUTY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 301 98 32; www.shnos.com.ar; Plaça de Sant Felip Neri 1; h10.30am-9pm; mJaume I)
This fragrant little shop sells handcrafted soaps of all sizes. Varieties like fig, cinnamon, grapefruit and chocolate smell good enough to eat, while sandalwood, magnolia, mint, cedar and jasmine add spice to any sink or bathtub.
EscribàFOOD & DRINKS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 301 60 27; www.escriba.es; La Rambla 83; h9am-10pm; W; mLiceu)
Chocolates, dainty pastries and mouth-watering cakes can be nibbled behind the Modernista mosaic facade here or taken away for private, guilt-ridden consumption. This Barcelona favourite is owned by the Escribà family, a name synonymous with sinfully good sweet things. More than that, it adds a touch of authenticity to La Rambla.
Formatgeria La SeuFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 412 65 48; www.formatgerialaseu.com; Carrer de la Dagueria 16; h10am-2pm & 5-8pm Tue-Sat, closed Aug; mJaume I)
Dedicated to artisan cheeses from all across Spain, this small shop is run by the oh-so-knowledgeable Katherine McLaughlin and is the antithesis of mass production – it sells only the best from small-scale farmers and the stock changes regularly. Wine and cheese tastings in the cosy room at the back are fun.
Herboristeria del ReiBEAUTY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 318 05 12; www.herboristeriadelrei.com; Carrer del Vidre 1; h2-8.30pm Mon, 10am-8.30pm Tue-Sat; mLiceu)
Once patronised by Queen Isabel II, this timeless corner store flogs all sorts of weird and wonderful herbs, spices and medicinal plants. It’s been doing so since 1823 and the decor has barely changed since the 1860s. However, some of the products have, and you’ll find anything from fragrant soaps to massage oil nowadays.
Taller de Marionetas TraviMARIONETTES
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 412 66 92; www.marionetastravi.com; Carrer de n'Amargós 4; hnoon-8pm Mon-Sat; mUrquinaona)
Opened in the 1970s, this atmospheric shop sells beautifully handcrafted marionettes. Don Quixote, Sancho Panza and other iconic Spanish figures are on hand, as well as unusual works from other parts of the world – including rare Sicilian puppets and pieces from Myanmar (Burma), Indonesia and elsewhere.
La Manual AlpargateraSHOES
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 301 01 72; www.lamanualalpargatera.es; Carrer d’Avinyó 7; h9.30am-1.30pm & 4.30-8pm Mon-Fri, from 10am Sat; mLiceu)
Clients from Salvador Dalí to Jean Paul Gaultier have ordered a pair of espadrilles (rope-soled canvas shoes) from this famous store. The shop was founded just after the Spanish Civil War, though the roots of the simple shoe design date back hundreds of years and originated in the Catalan Pyrenees.
El Raval
El Raval boasts a handful of art galleries around MACBA, along with a burgeoning second-hand and vintage-clothes scene on Carrer de la Riera Baixa. Carrer dels Tallers is one of the city’s main music strips.
oLes TopettesBEAUTY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 500 55 64; www.lestopettes.com; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 33; h11am-2pm & 4-9pm Tue-Sat; mUniversitat)
It's a sign of the times that such a chic little temple to soap and perfume can exist in El Raval. The items in Les Topettes' collection have been picked for their designs as much as the products themselves, and you'll find gorgeously packaged scents, candles and unguents from Diptyque, Cowshed and L'Artisan Parfumeur, among others.
TeranyinaARTS & CRAFTS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.textilteranyina.com; Carrer del Notariat 10; h11am-3pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri; mCatalunya)
Artist Teresa Rosa Aguayo runs this textile workshop in the heart of the artsy bit of El Raval. You can join courses at the loom, admire some of the rugs and other works that Teresa has created, and, of course, buy them.
La Ribera
The former commercial heart of medieval Barcelona is today still home to a cornucopia of old-style specialist food and drink shops, a veritable feast of aroma and atmosphere. They have been joined, since the late 1990s, by a raft of hip little fashion stores.
El Rei de la MàgiaMAGIC
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 39 20; www.elreydelamagia.com; Carrer de la Princesa 11; h10.30am-2pm & 4-7.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
For more than 100 years, the people behind this box of tricks have been keeping locals both astounded and amused. Should you decide to stay in Barcelona and make a living as a magician, this is the place to buy levitation brooms, glasses of disappearing milk and decks of magic cards.
Hofmann PastisseriaFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 268 82 21; www.hofmann-bcn.com; Carrer dels Flassaders 44; h9am-2pm & 3.30-8pm Mon-Thu, 9am-8.30pm Fri & Sat, 9am-2.30pm Sun; mBarceloneta)
With its painted wooden cabinets, this bite-sized gourmet patisserie, linked to the prestigious Hofmann cooking school, has an air of timelessness. Choose between jars of delicious chocolates, the renowned croissants (in various flavours) and more dangerous pastries, or an array of cakes and other sweet treats.
El MagníficoCOFFEE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 39 75; www.cafeselmagnifico.com; Carrer de l’Argenteria 64; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
All sorts of coffee has been roasted here since the early 20th century. The variety of coffee (and tea) available is remarkable – and the aromas hit you as you walk in. Across the road, the same people run the exquisite tea shop Sans i Sans ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 310 25 18; Carrer de l’Argenteria 59; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I).
Casa GispertFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 75 35; www.casagispert.com; Carrer dels Sombrerers 23; h10am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
The wonderful, atmospheric and wood-fronted Casa Gispert has been toasting nuts and selling all manner of dried fruit since 1851. Pots and jars piled high on the shelves contain an unending variety of crunchy titbits: some roasted, some honeyed, all of them moreish. Your order is shouted over to the till, along with the price, in a display of old-world accounting.
Vila VinitecaWINE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %902 327777; www.vilaviniteca.es; Carrer dels Agullers 7; h8.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
One of the best wine stores in Barcelona (and there are a few…), Vila Viniteca has been searching out the best local and imported wines since 1932. On a couple of November evenings it organises what has become an almost riotous wine-tasting event in Carrer dels Agullers and surrounding lanes, at which cellars from around Spain present their young new wines.
LoisaidaCLOTHING, ANTIQUES
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 295 54 92; www.loisaidabcn.com; Carrer dels Flassaders 42; h11am-9pm Mon-Sat, 11am-2pm & 4-8pm Sun; mJaume I)
A sight in its own right, housed in what was once the coach house and stables for the Royal Mint, Loisaida (from the Spanglish for 'Lower East Side') is a deceptively large emporium of colourful, retro and somewhat preppy clothing for men and women, costume jewellery, music from the 1940s and '50s and some covetable antiques.
Arlequí MàscaresARTS & CRAFTS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 268 27 52; www.arlequimask.com; Carrer de la Princesa 7; h10.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat, 10.30am-3pm & 4-7.30pm Sun; mJaume I)
A wonderful little oasis of originality, this shop specialises in masks for costume and decoration. Some of the pieces are superb, while stock also includes a beautiful range of decorative boxes in Catalan themes, and some old-style marionettes.
Nu SabatesSHOES
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 268 03 83; www.nusabates.com; Carrer dels Cotoners 14; h11am-9pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
A couple of modern-day Catalan cobblers have put together some original handmade leather shoes for men and women (and a handful of bags and other leather items) in their friendly and stylish locale, which is enlivened by some inspired musical selections.
OlisolivaFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 268 14 72; www.olisoliva.com; Mercat de Santa Caterina; h9.30am-3.30pm Mon, Wed & Sat, to 8.30pm Tue & Thu; mJaume I)
Inside the Mercat de Santa Caterina, this simple, glassed-in store is stacked with olive oils and vinegars from all over Spain. Taste some of the products before deciding. Some of the best olive oils come from southern Spain. The range of vinegars is astounding too.
Custo BarcelonaFASHION & ACCESSORIES
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 268 78 93; www.custo.com; Plaça de les Olles 7; h10am-9pm Mon-Sat, noon-8pm Sun; mBarceloneta)
The psychedelic decor and casual atmosphere lend this avant-garde Barcelona fashion store a youthful edge. Custo presents daring new women’s and men’s collections each year on the New York catwalks. The dazzling colours and cut of everything from dinner jackets to hot pants are for the uninhibited. It has three other stores around town.
La BotifarreriaFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 319 91 23; www.labotifarreria.com; Carrer de Santa Maria 4; h8.30am-2.30pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
Say it with a sausage! Although this delightful deli sells all sorts of goodies, the mainstay is an astounding variety of handcrafted sausages – the botifarra. Not just the regular pork variety either – these sausages are stuffed with anything from green pepper and whisky to apple curry.
Barceloneta & the Waterfront
Els Encants VellsMARKET
(Fira de Bellcaire; GOOGLE MAP ; %93 246 30 30; www.encantsbcn.com; Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes; h9am-8pm Mon, Wed, Fri & Sat; mGlòries)
In a gleaming open-sided complex near Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes, the ‘Old Charms’ flea market is the biggest of its kind in Barcelona. Over 500 vendors ply their wares beneath massive mirror-like panels. It’s all here, from antique furniture through to secondhand clothes. A lot of it is junk, but occasionally you’ll stumble across a ganga (bargain).
System ActionCLOTHING
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 225 79 90; systemaction.es; Carrer de Pere IV 122; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat; mLlacuna)
If you like discovering local producers, then look no further than this outlet store on Pere IV. Though System Action has stores all across Catalunya (and in Madrid), its design headquarters are a few blocks south in a former Poblenou ice factory. Fashions are feminine but rugged, and you'll find good basics here. Very wearable scarves, sweaters, skirts and even shoes.
La Sagrada Família & L'Eixample
Cacao SampakaFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 272 08 33; www.cacaosampaka.com; Carrer del Consell de Cent 292; h9am-9pm Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Chocoholics will be convinced they have died and passed on to a better place. Load up in the shop or head for the bar out the back where you can have a classic xocolata (hot chocolate) and munch on exquisite chocolate cakes, tarts, ice cream, sweets and sandwiches. The bonbons make particularly good presents.
AltaïrBOOKS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 342 71 71; www.altair.es; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 616; h10am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; W; mCatalunya)
Enter a wonderland of travel in this extensive bookshop, which is a mecca for guidebooks, maps, travel literature and all sorts of other books likely to induce a severe case of itchy feet. It has a travellers’ noticeboard and, downstairs, a travel agent.
Norma ComicsBOOKS
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 244 81 25; www.normacomics.com; Passeig de Sant Joan 7-9; h10.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mArc de Triomf)
With a huge range of comics, both Spanish and international, this is Spain’s biggest dealer – everything from Tintin to some of the weirdest sci-fi and sex comics can be found here. Also on show are armies of model superheroes and other characters produced by fevered imaginations. Kids from nine to 99 can be seen snapping up items to add to their collections.
FNACDEPARTMENT STORE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %902 100632; www.fnac.es; El Triangle, Plaça de Catalunya 4; h10am-9.30pm Mon-Sat; mCatalunya)
FNAC, the French book, CD and electronics emporium, has a couple of branches around town, but this is the biggest.
Lurdes BergadaCLOTHING
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 218 48 51; www.lurdesbergada.es; Rambla de Catalunya 112; h10.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mDiagonal)
Lurdes Bergada is a boutique run by mother-and-son designer team Lurdes Bergada and Syngman Cucala. The classy men’s and women’s fashions use natural fibres and have attracted a cult following.
Joan MúrriaFOOD
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 215 57 89; www.murria.cat; Carrer de Roger de Llúria 85; h9am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Ramon Casas designed the century-old Modernista shopfront advertisements featured at this culinary temple. For a century the gluttonous have trembled at this altar of speciality food goods from around Catalonia and beyond.
Gràcia & Park Güell
A wander along the narrow lanes of Gràcia turns up all sorts of surprises, mostly tiny enterprises producing a variety of pretty garments and trinkets. These places tend to come and go, so you never quite know what you might find. Carrer de Verdi has plenty of interesting boutiques.
Amapola Vegan ShopCLOTHING
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 010 62 73; www.amapolaveganshop.com; Travessera de Gràcia 129; h11am-2.30pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mFontana, Diagonal)
A shop with a heart of gold, Amapola proves that you need not toss your ethics aside in the quest for stylish clothing and accessories. You'll find sleek leather alternatives for wallets, handbags and messenger bags by Matt & Nat, dainty ballerina-style flats by Victoria and elegant scarves by Barts.
Lady LoquitaCLOTHING
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 217 82 92; www.ladyloquita.com; Travessera de Gràcia 126; h11am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mFontana)
Lady Loquita is a hip little shop, where you can browse through light summer dresses by Tiralahilacha, evening wear by Japamala and handmade jewellery by local design label Klimbim. There are also whimsical odds and ends: dinner plates with dog people portraits and digital prints on wood by About Paola.
La FestivalWINE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 023 22 81; Carrer de Verdi 67; h5.30-9.30pm Mon, 10.30am-9.30pm Tue-Sat, 11am-2pm Sun; mFontana)
This handsomely designed shop earns high marks for its knowledgeable (and English-speaking) staff who can give you a wealth of information about the many excellent wines for sale here. Most bottles are from Spanish producers, though there are a few French options, and some organic as well as biodynamic wines.
Bodega BonavistaWINE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 218 81 99; Carrer de Bonavista 10; h10am-2.30pm & 5-9pm Mon-Fri, noon-3pm & 6-9pm Sat, noon-3pm Sun; mFontana)
An excellent little neighbourhood wine shop that endeavours to seek out great wines at reasonable prices. The stock is mostly from Catalonia and elsewhere in Spain, but there's also a good selection from France. The Bonavista also acts as a deli, and there are some especially good cheeses.
Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta
Although many of Barcelona’s better-off folks descend from the ‘High Zone’ to L’Eixample to shop, there are still plenty of trendy little boutiques scattered around La Zona Alta.
LabperfumBEAUTY
( GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Santaló 45; h11am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Sat; dFGC Muntaner)
This tiny shop looks like an old apothecary, with its shelves lined with pretty glass bottles. What's for sale are extraordinary fragrances (for men and women) made in-house. Scents diverge from run-of-the-mill Obsession, with varieties like tobacco, black orchid and leather. You can also buy scented candles, soaps and creams. Beautiful packaging and fair prices (starting at €14 for 50ml).
FC Botiga MegastoreGIFTS & SOUVENIRS
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 409 02 71; www.fcbmegastore.com; Gate 9, off Avinguda Joan de XXIII; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat, to 3pm Sun; mPalau Reial, Collblanc)
This sprawling three-storey shop in Camp Nou has footballs, shirts, scarves, socks, wallets, bags, sneakers, smartphone covers – pretty much anything you can think of – all featuring Barça's famous red-and-blue insignia.
Oriol BalaguerFOOD
( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 201 18 46; www.oriolbalaguer.com; Plaça de Sant Gregori Taumaturg 2; h10am-2pm & 5-9pm Mon-Sat; dFGC La Bonanova)
Oriol Balaguer whips up magnificent sweet creations, doled out in their museumlike shop.
Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni
Shopping options are fairly limited among these neighbourhoods. Sant Antoni offers the best exploring for shoppers, with a famed food market, and a growing number of second-hand shops and galleries sprinkled on its tree-lined streets. The streets near Carrer del Parlament are the best place to roam.
GaleriART
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %93 124 13 30; Carrer de Viladomat 27; h11am-2pm & 5-9pm Tue-Sat; mPoble Sec)
This boxy, brightly lit gallery sells prints by Catalan artists as well as unusual graphic T-shirts, canvas bags and small ceramics – delicate conversation pieces, just small enough to fit in a carry-on. There are also a few original paintings and sculptures, from an ever-changing collection.


WARNING: KEEP AN EYE ON YOUR VALUABLES
Every year aggrieved readers write in with tales of woe from Barcelona. Petty crime and theft, with tourists as the prey of choice, are a problem, so you need to take a few common-sense precautions. Thieves and pickpockets operate on airport trains and the metro, especially around stops popular with tourists (such as La Sagrada Família). The Old City (Ciutat Vella) is the pickpockets’ and bag-snatchers’ prime hunting ground. Take special care on and around La Rambla. Prostitutes working the lower (waterfront) end often do a double trade in wallet snatching.

Getting There & Away
AIR
After Madrid, Barcelona is Spain’s busiest international transport hub and a host of airlines, including many budget carriers, fly directly to Barcelona from around Europe. Ryanair uses Girona and Reus airports (buses link Barcelona to both). Iberia, Air Europa, Spanair and Vueling all have dense networks across the country and, while flights can be costly, you can save considerable time by flying from Barcelona to distant cities like Seville or Málaga.
Barcelona’s El Prat airport lies 17km southwest of Plaça de Catalunya at El Prat de Llobregat.
BOAT
Barcelona has ferry connections to the Balearic Islands and Italy.
Passenger and vehicular ferries operated by Acciona Trasmediterránea (%902 454645; www.trasmediterranea.es; mDrassanes) to/from the Balearic Islands dock around the Moll de Barcelona wharf ( GOOGLE MAP ) in Port Vell.
Grandi Navi Veloci ( GOOGLE MAP ; %in Italy +39 010 209 4591; www1.gnv.it; mDrassanes) runs high-speed, luxury ferries three (sometimes more) days a week between Genoa and Barcelona. The journey takes 18 hours. Ticket prices vary wildly depending on season and how far in advance you purchase them. The same company runs a similar number of ferries between Barcelona and Tangier, Morocco (voyage time about 26 hours).
Grimaldi Ferries ( GOOGLE MAP ; %902 53 13 33, in Italy +39 081 496 444; www.grimaldi-lines.com; mDrassanes) operates similar services from Barcelona to Civitavecchia (near Rome, 20½ hours, six to seven times a week), Livorno (Tuscany, 19½ hours, three times a week) and Porto Torres (northwest Sardinia, 12 hours, daily).
BUS
Barcelona is well-connected by bus to other parts of Spain, as well as to major European cities.
Long-distance buses leave from Estació del Nord ( GOOGLE MAP ; %902 26 06 06; www.barcelonanord.cat; Carrer d’Ali Bei 80; mArc de Triomf). A plethora of companies service different parts of Spain; many come under the umbrella of Alsa (%902 422242; www.alsa.es). For other companies, ask at the bus station. There are frequent services to Madrid, Valencia and Zaragoza (20 or more a day) and several daily departures to distant destinations such as Burgos, Santiago de Compostela and Seville.
CAR & MOTORCYCLE
Vehicles must be roadworthy, registered and have third-party insurance.
Ask your insurer for a European Accident Statement form, which can simplify matters in the event of an accident.
A European breakdown assistance policy is a good investment.
EU national driver’s licences are accepted, as are those from some other non-EU countries (like Switzerland). Otherwise, an international driving licence is a good idea.
TRAIN
The main train station in Barcelona is Estació Sants ( GOOGLE MAP ; Plaça dels Països Catalans; mEstació Sants), located 2.5km west of La Rambla. Direct overnight trains from Paris, Geneva, Milan and Zurich arrive here.
Train is the most convenient overland option for reaching Barcelona from major Spanish centres like Madrid and Valencia. It can be a long haul from other parts of Europe – budget flights frequently offer a saving in time and money.
A network of rodalies/cercanías serves towns around Barcelona (and the airport). Contact Renfe (%902 320320; www.renfe.es). Eighteen high-speed Tren de Alta Velocidad Española (AVE) trains between Madrid and Barcelona run daily in each direction, nine of them in under three hours.
8Getting Around
Barcelona has abundant options for getting around town. The excellent metro can get you most places, with buses and trams filling in the gaps. Taxis are the best option late at night.
BUS
Transports Metropolitans de Barcelona (TMB; %93 298 70 00; www.tmb.net) buses run along most city routes every few minutes from between 5am and 6.30am to around 10pm and 11pm. Many routes pass through Plaça de Catalunya and/or Plaça de la Universitat. After 11pm a reduced network of yellow nitbusos (night buses) runs until 3am or 5am. All nitbus routes pass through Plaça de Catalunya and most run every 30 to 45 minutes.

CAR & MOTORCYCLE
With the convenience of public transport and the high price of parking in the city, it's unwise to drive in Barcelona. However, if you're planning a road trip outside the city, a car is handy.
Avis, Europcar, National/Atesa and Hertz have desks at El Prat airport, Estació Sants and Estació del Nord. Rental outlets in Barcelona include the following:
Avis ( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 344 37 00; www.avis.com; Carrer de Còrsega 293-295; mDiagonal)
Cooltra ( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 221 40 70; www.cooltra.com; Via Laietana 6; h10am-7pm; mBarceloneta) You can rent scooters here for around €35 (plus insurance). Cooltra also organises scooter tours.
Europcar ( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 302 05 43; www.europcar.com; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 680; mGirona)
Hertz ( GOOGLE MAP ; %902 998707; www.hertz.com; Carrer de Viriat 45; mSants Estació)
MondoRent ( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 295 32 68; www.mondorent.com; Passeig de Joan de Borbó 80-84; h10am-7pm; mBarceloneta) Rents scooters as well as electric bikes.
National/Atesa ( GOOGLE MAP ; %93 323 07 01; www.enterprise.es; Carrer de Muntaner 45; mUniversitat)
METRO
The easy-to-use TMB Metro system has 11 numbered and colour-coded lines. It runs from 5am to midnight Sunday to Thursday and holidays, from 5am to 2am on Friday and days immediately preceding holidays, and 24 hours on Saturday.
Ongoing work to expand the metro continues on several lines. Líneas 9 and 10 will eventually connect with the airport (2016 at the earliest).
Suburban trains run by the Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya (FGC; %900 901515; www.fgc.net) include a couple of useful city lines. All lines heading north from Plaça de Catalunya stop at Carrer de Provença and Gràcia. One of these lines (L7) goes to Tibidabo and another (L6 to Reina Elisenda) has a stop near the Monestir de Pedralbes. Most trains from Plaça de Catalunya continue beyond Barcelona to Sant Cugat, Sabadell and Terrassa. Other FGC lines head west from Plaça d’Espanya, including one for Manresa that is handy for the trip to Montserrat.
Depending on the line, these trains run from about 5am (with only one or two services before 6am) to 11pm or midnight Sunday to Thursday, and from 5am to about 1am on Friday and Saturday.
TAXI
Taxis charge €2.10 flag fall plus meter charges of €1.03 per kilometre (€1.30 from 8pm to 8am and all day on weekends). A further €3.10 is added for all trips to/from the airport, and €1 for luggage bigger than 55cm x 35cm x 35cm. The trip from Estació Sants to Plaça de Catalunya, about 3km, costs about €11. You can flag a taxi down in the streets or call one:
Fonotaxi (%93 300 11 00)
Radio Taxi 033 (%93 303 30 33; http://radiotaxi033.com)
The call-out charge is €3.40 (€4.20 at night and on weekends). In many taxis it is possible to pay with a credit card and, if you have a local telephone number, you can join the T033 Ràdio taxi service for booking taxis online (www.radiotaxi033.com, in Spanish). You can also book online at www.catalunyataxi.com.
Taxi Amic (%93 420 80 88; www.taxi-amic-adaptat.com) is a special taxi service for people with disabilities or difficult situations (such as transport of big objects). Book at least 24 hours in advance if possible.
TRAM
There are a handful of tram lines (%900 701 181; www.tram.cat) in the city. All standard transport passes are valid. A scenic option is the tramvia blau (blue tram), which runs up to the foot of Tibidabo.
AT1, T2 and T3 Run into the suburbs of greater Barcelona from Plaça de Francesc Macià and are of limited interest to visitors.
AT4 Runs from behind the zoo (near the Ciutadella Vila Olímpica metro stop) to Sant Adrià via Glòries and the Fòrum.
AT5 Runs from Glòries to Badalona (Gorg stop).
AT6 Runs between Badalona (Gorg) and Sant Adrià.



=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================


Catalonia


Why Go?
Catalonia feels distinct from the rest of Spain, and its four provinces enclose an impressive wealth of natural splendour. Pyrenean peaks loom above meadows and fertile vineyards, plains are pock-marked with volcanic cones, and rocky coves punctuate sandy beaches.
The Costa Brava’s shores are its biggest lure, though travellers will also discover medieval architecture and Jewish history in Girona and Besalú, and Salvador Dalí's gloriously surreal 'theatre-museum' in Figueres.
For adventure, head north where the Pyrenees rise to 3000m peaks. Here, hiking trails weave among valleys and lonely villages are crowned with Romanesque churches and monasteries. Stepping even further back in time, the Roman and Greek ruins of Tarragona and Empúries are among Spain’s most impressive. And an entirely different landscape awaits in the Delta de l’Ebre’s shimmering wetlands, home to flocks of pirouetting flamingos.
When to Go

AMay The Costa Brava's beaches are free from crowds, though the water is a little chilly.
ASep The Catalan Pyrenees are aflame in autumnal colours, and the hiking is perfect.
AOct–Nov The museums and galleries of the Dalí circuit are at their quiet best.
Best Places to Eat
A El Celler de Can Roca
A Cal Ton
A La Cuina de Can Simon
A El Jardinet
A Can Ventura
Best Places to Sleep
A Mil Estrelles
A Parador Ducs de Cardona
A Hotel Durán
A Hotel Els Caçadors
A Villa Paulita
Catalonia Highlights

1 Begur Discovering secret coves around Begur on the Costa Brava.
2 Teatre-Museu Dalí Contemplating Dalí's theatre of the absurd with a visit to Figueres.
3 Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici Conquering the trails in Catalonia's sole national park.
4 Cistercian Route Admiring stately monasteries along this hilly inland driving route.
5 Sitges Partying hard in this upbeat, gay-friendly seaside town.
6 Girona Exploring medieval laneways and thrilling museums.
7 Delta de l’Ebre Watching flocks of flamingos turn the skies pink.
8 Olot Feeling a rumble beneath your feet in Olot's volcano-carved hills.
9 Illes Medes Diving into a marine wonderland at these inspiring isles.
a Tarragona Gawking at Roman ruins right in the centre of a lively city.
COSTA BRAVA
Stretching north to the French border, the Costa Brava, or 'rugged coast', is by far the prettiest of Spain's three principal holiday coasts. Though you'll find plenty of tourism development and English breakfasts, there are also unspoiled coves, charming seaside towns with quality restaurants, spectacular scenery, and some of Spain's best diving around the protected Illes Medes.
Nestling in the hilly backcountry – green and covered in umbrella pine in the south, barer and browner in the north – are charming stone villages and the towering monastery of Sant Pere de Rodes. A little further inland are the bigger towns of Girona, with its sizeable and strikingly well-preserved medieval centre, and Figueres, famous for its bizarre Teatre-Museu Dalí, foremost of a series of sites associated with the eccentric surrealist artist Salvador Dalí.
The coastal settlements are very – and we mean very – quiet in winter.

Tossa de Mar
Pop 5681
Tossa de Mar curves around a boat-speckled bay, guarded by a headland crowned with impressive defensive medieval walls and towers. Tourism has bolted a larger, modern extension onto this picturesque village of crooked, narrow streets, though its old town and clifftop views retain their magic.
Tossa was one of the first places on the Costa Brava to attract foreign visitors: a small colony of artists and writers gravitated towards what painter Marc Chagall dubbed ‘Blue Paradise’ in the 1930s. It was made famous by Ava Gardner in the 1951 film Pandora and the Flying Dutchman; you'll find a statue of the silver-screen queen along the path towards the lighthouse.
In July and August it’s hard to reach the water’s edge without tripping over oily limbs. Out of high season it is still an enchanting place to visit, though many attractions and amenities limit their hours or close shop entirely.
1Sights
Far de TossaLIGHTHOUSE
( GOOGLE MAP ; adult/child €3/1.50; h10am-8pm Apr-Oct, to 6pm Tue-Sun Nov-Mar)
Mont Guardí is crowned with this 1919 lighthouse, beneath which there's a 20-minute walk-through display on the history of lighthouses and life inside them. Concerts are held in the glow of the lighthouse during July and August (additional charges apply).
4Sleeping
Hotel HermesHOSTAL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 34 02 96; www.hotelhermes-tossademar.com; Avinguda de Ferràn Agulló 6; s/d/tr/q €38/60/75/90; hEaster-Oct; iWs)
Rooms at this friendly guesthouse are a steal, considering the location one block from the bus station. There's a good quality cafe downstairs, cheery service and a rooftop Jacuzzi.
oCap d’OrHOSTAL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 34 00 81; www.hotelcapdor.com; Passeig del Mar 1; s/d/q incl breakfast €69/112/179; hEaster-Oct; aW)
Rub up against the town’s history in this family-run spot right in front of the town walls. Rooms are lovingly decorated in an array of pastel tones, each with its own medley of vintage-feel picture frames and cutesy marine miscellany. The best of them look straight onto the beach.
Hotel DianaHOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 34 18 86; www.hotelesdante.com; Plaça d’Espanya 6; d/ste incl breakfast from €80/120; hApr-Oct; paW)
Fronting Platja Gran, this artistic hotel in a 1906 mansion is lavished with Modernista fittings fashioned by one of Gaudí's architectural disciples. Stained glass, wrought-iron furnishings and vintage-style headboards infuse the place with an old-world glamour, and many rooms have divine beach views. Off-site parking is an additional €10 to €20.
5Eating
Restaurant BahiaSEAFOOD€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 34 03 22; www.restaurantbahiatossa.com; Passeig del Mar 19; mains €13; h1-3.30pm & 7-10.30pm)
Grilled sardines and pans of paella crowd the tables of this charming seafood place. The interior is decorated with local ceramics and tables spilling onto the road allow a glimpse of the beach.
oLa Cuina de Can SimonCATALAN€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 34 12 69; http://restaurantcansimon.com; Carrer del Portal 24; mains €22-35, tasting menus €68-98; h1-3.30pm Wed-Sun, 8-10.30pm Wed-Sat)
This is the standout star of a slew of restaurants hugging the stretch of old wall along Carrer del Portal. Within a former fisherman’s stone house, La Cuina de Can Simon credits its innovative dishes to a dual heritage: the owner's grandfathers were a fisherman and an artist. Flavoursome fusions such as tuna with wasabi gnocchi, or crunchy pineapple with cinnamon ice cream, are money well spent. Opens daily in summer.
6Drinking & Nightlife
Bar El Far de TossaCOCKTAIL BAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; Mont Guardí; h11am-late)
Perched on Mont Guardí next to the lighthouse is this bar with a terrace overhanging a steep drop. Views of cliffs speckled with cacti plummeting towards the inky sea can inspire vertigo, so take the edge off with a cocktail (€8.50). Its 'Ava Gardner' is a blend of strawberry, vodka and Cointreau; but you're here for the best views in town, rather than the mixology.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 34 01 08; www.infotossa.com; Avinguda del Pelegrí 25; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat)
Next to the bus station. During high season it opens from 9am to 9pm.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa (www.sarfa.com) runs to/from Barcelona’s Estació del Nord (€12.15, 1¼ hours, five to seven daily) and also has direct airport services. The bus station is next to the tourist office.
The C32 autopista connects Tossa to Barcelona, while the picturesque GI682 snakes spectacularly 23km northeast to Sant Feliu de Guíxols.
WORTH A TRIP
MODERNIST CEMETERY

Modernist CemeteryCEMETERY
(Camí del Repòs 1; h8am-8pm Apr-Oct, 8am-6pm Nov-Mar)
Even if you're not usually lured by the dark side, this extraordinary cemetery is more like a modernist sculpture gallery than a sombre memorial site. Tombs are trimmed with Gothic tracery, topped with dragons clutching skulls, or shaped like maidens ecstatically wreathed in roses. Opened in 1901, the cemetery has artworks from Catalan sculptors and architects including Josep Puig i Cadafalch and Vicenç Artigas. The cemetery is northwest of central Lloret de Mar, and just 200m south of the tourist office.
THE CHANGING FORTUNES OF CATALONIA

Like many European nations, the kingdom of Spain was cobbled together, by a series of conquests and dynastic alliances, from what were once separate states. Though the last of these was over 500 years ago, folk in the peninsula still tend to identify more strongly with their ancestral village or local region – the patria chica ('small fatherland') than with the nation as a whole. There are separatist movements in many parts of the peninsula but especially in two regions: the Basque country and Catalonia.
Away from the big cities and Costa Brava, Catalonia feels as if you’ve entered a separate country. Virtually no Spanish is spoken and the red-and-yellow flag of the region flutters from the balconies. The overall feeling, as expressed by an oft-encountered piece of graffiti, is that ‘Catalonia is not Spain’.
The genesis of Catalonia began when the Franks, under Charlemagne, pushed back the Moors in the 8th and 9th centuries. The Catalan golden age began in the early 12th century when Ramon Berenguer III, who already controlled Catalonia and parts of southern France, launched the region’s first seagoing fleet. In 1137 his successor, Ramon Berenguer IV, was betrothed to the one-year-old heiress to the Aragonese throne, thereby giving Catalonia sufficient power to expand its empire out into the Mediterranean but joining it to another crown. When Fernando became king of Aragón in 1479 having already married Isabel, Queen of Castile, Spain was more or less created. Catalonia resented its new subordinate status but could do little to overturn it. After backing the losing side in the War of Spanish Succession (1702–14), Barcelona rose up against the Spanish crown, whose armies besieged the city from March 1713 until 11 September 1714. The victorious Felipe V abolished Catalan privileges, built a huge fort (the Ciutadella) to watch over the city, banned writing and teaching in the Catalan language, and farmed out Catalonia’s colonies to other European powers.
Trade again flourished from Barcelona in the centuries that followed, and by the late 19th and early 20th centuries there were growing calls for greater self-governance to go with the city’s burgeoning economic power. However, after the civil war ended in 1939, pro-republic Catalonia was treated harshly by victorious General Franco. Reprisals and purges resulted in the shootings of at least 35,000 people. Over time, the use of Catalan in public was banned and all street and town names were changed into Spanish, which became the only permitted language in schools and the media. Self-government was returned after Franco's death in 1975 though the sense of grievance remains.
Recent decades have seen Catalan culture flourish: you'll see this reflected in the reemergence of traditional festivals and dances, the prevalence of Catalan flags on many facades and the near-universal use of Catalan in public. Unlike, for example, the Basque country, there is no real sense of ethnic identity in Catalonia. For Catalans, their language is the key to their identity.
The issue of independence from Spain has been at the forefront of Catalan politics for years, and in recent times has snowballed with regular demonstrations and events. The 2014 Catalan poll in favour of independence was declared illegal by Madrid. In September 2015, pro-independence coalition Junts Pel Sí ('Together for yes') won over 39% of voters in Catalan parliamentary elections. The question of Catalan independence dominated discourse about the elections, which were treated by many as an unofficial referendum. At time of research, the Catalan parliament was formulating a plan to exit by 2017, to a furious response in Madrid.
Some Catalans feel their taxes subsidise the rest of the nation, and the tough economic times have exacerbated this feeling. But the very fact that Catalonia is such a valuable asset makes the central government very unwilling to let it go and, constitutionally at least, a Catalan secession would have to be approved by a nationwide referendum: a very unlikely scenario.
Sant Feliu de Guíxols
Pop 21,810
Grip your steering wheel along 23 magnificent kilometres of snaking roads eastwards from Tossa de Mar. The reward is reaching Sant Feliu de Guíxols, a beach town with more than its fair share of historical architecture. Most impressive is the 10th-century monastery, but there are remnants of centuries past in the lanes that jut out from Plaça del Mercat. Sant Feliu also has an attractive waterside promenade, and walking trails that are well signposted from its sandy beach.
1Sights
Centuries of history echo among the walls of Sant Feliu de Guíxols' narrow laneways. Look out for Carrer de la Notaria, a late-18th-century street that survived mysterious arson attempts. Admirers of architecture may also wish to check out Plaça del Mercat, where the town's market hall was built in 1929.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(h9.30am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Fri, 10am-8pm Sat & Sun)
With info on Sant Feliu de Guíxols and the rest of the Costa Brava, this office is part of the monastery complex, near the Porta Ferrada. It operates extended hours during high summer.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa buses reach Sant Feliu de Guíxols from Barcelona (€15.40, 1½ hours, seven daily), Girona (€8.30, two hours, three daily) and Palafrugell (€3.10, 50 minutes, 12 to 15 daily).
Palafrugell & Around
Halfway up the coast from Barcelona to the French border begins one of the most beautiful stretches of the Costa Brava. The town of Palafrugell, 4km inland, is the main access point for a cluster of enticing beach spots. Calella de Palafrugell, Llafranc and Tamariu, one-time fishing villages squeezed into small bays, are three of the Costa Brava’s most charming, low-key resorts.
Begur, 7km northeast of Palafrugell, is a handsomely conserved, castle-topped village with a cluster of less-developed beaches nearby. Inland, seek out charming Pals and the fabulous village of Peratallada.
Palafrugell
Pop 22,763
Palafrugell is the main transport, shopping and service hub for the stretch of Costa Brava extending from Calella de Palafrugell to Begur. But this inland town is more than a way station en route to the beach. There are artistic and cultural treasures to uncover in Plaça Can Mario, plus one of the region's most striking Gothic churches.
1Sights
Museu del SuroMUSEUM
(www.museudelsuro.cat; Carrer de Begur; adult/child €3/1.50; h10am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
This surprisingly large and modern museum within an old factory has audiovisual displays detailing Catalonia's cork industry. Cork cutting and branding machinery, cork transport, and other mysteries are unveiled, while coats of arms made entirely of cork number among the more peculiar sights. The examination station with microscopes might seem like overkill for cork novices, but this museum offers a worthwhile glimpse of an industry critical to Palafrugell.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 30 02 28; www.visitpalafrugell.cat; Avenida de la Generalitat 33; h10am-1pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 10am-1pm Sun)
The tourist office is just off the C66 highway en route to central Palafrugell. It operates longer hours in high season.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa buses run between Palafrugell and Barcelona (€18.50, 2¼ hours, seven daily) and Girona (€6.50, one hour, at least 12 daily).
Calella de Palafrugell
Pop 747
The whitewashed buildings of Calella, the southernmost of Palafrugell’s crown jewels, are strung Aegean-style around a bay of rocky points and small, pretty beaches, with a few fishing boats hauled up on the sand. Though deservedly well known for its beauteous bay, Calella has resisted the temptation to sprawl, and has an agreeably hidden feel, despite being merrily full of visitors in summer.
1Sights & Activities
In addition to lingering on one of the beaches, you can stroll along pretty coastal footpaths northeast to Llafranc (30 minutes) and beyond, or south to Platja del Golfet beach, close to Cap Roig (about 40 minutes).
zFestivals & Events
Festival de Cap RoigMUSIC
(www.caproigfestival.com; hmid-Jul–Aug)
Excellent music festival held at the Jardins de Cap Roig around mid-July to late August, featuring anything from rock to jazz, and big, big names.
Cantada d'HavaneresMUSIC
(havanerescalella.cat; hJul)
Havaneres are melancholy Caribbean sea shanties that became popular among Costa Brava sailors in the 19th century, when Catalonia maintained busy links with Cuba. These folksy concerts are traditionally accompanied by the drinking of cremat – a rum, coffee, sugar, lemon and cinnamon concoction that you set alight briefly before quaffing.
4Sleeping & Eating
oHotel MediterraniBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€€
(%972 61 45 00; www.hotelmediterrani.com; Carrer Lladó 55; s €135, d €160-210; hApr-Oct; paW)
Swish, arty rooms decked out in placid creams, with breathtaking views of a hidden sliver of sand and an aquamarine sea, make this hotel at the southern end of town very hard to beat.
XabecCATALAN€€
(%972 61 46 10; www.restaurantxabec.com; Carrer de Lladó 6; mains €12-18; h1-3.30pm & 8-11pm Fri-Wed Easter-Oct)
Follow the metal boat sign on Carrer de Lladó towards delectable local fare, including squid-ink risotto and Catalan sausage. The interior, decorated with fishing nets and cannons, manages to strike an agreeable balance between chintzy and chic.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 61 44 75; www.visitpalafrugell.cat; Carrer de les Voltes 6; h10am-8pm)
By the beachfront strip; opens shorter hours in low season.
8Getting There & Away
Buses from Palafrugell serve Calella (€1.70, four daily – more in summer, 20 minutes).
Llafranc
Pop 320
Barely 2km northeast of Calella de Palafrugell, and now merging with it along the roads set back from the rocky coast between them, upmarket Llafranc has a small bay and a long, handsome stretch of sand, cupped on either side by pine-dotted craggy coastline.
1Sights & Activities
The GR92 path links Llafranc with the other nearby coastal villages – these are short, spectacular walks. There are plenty of easy walks that you can complete wearing your beach sandals; ask at the tourist office for details. There are also good diving excursions available.
oCap de Sant SebastiàVIEWPOINT
This magical spot up east of town offers fabulous views in both directions and out to sea. There's a lighthouse here, as well as a 15th-century watch tower and chapel now incorporated into romantic Hotel El Far. You'll also find the ruins of a pre-Roman Iberian settlement with multilingual explanatory panels. It’s a 40-minute walk up: follow the steps from the harbour and the road up to the right. You can continue from here to Tamariu (one hour).
4Sleeping & Eating
Hostal CelimarHOSTAL€€
(%972 30 13 74; www.hostalcelimar.com; Carrer de Carudo 12-14; s/d/tr/q €55/75/90/120; hMar-Oct; W)
This crimson-painted hostal, barely a stumble from the beach, is hard to miss. It offers immaculate white-walled rooms and spotless bathrooms, and has a pleasant downstairs bar with a nautical theme. It's friendly, no-frills and a marvellous deal for the price.
Hotel El FarHOTEL€€€
(%972 30 16 39; www.elfar.com; Cap de Sant Sebastià; r €225-290; hmid-Feb–Dec; paW)
A happy marriage between secluded clifftop luxury and excellent local seafood can be found here. Each room has its own large balcony affording superb sea views and the restaurant beneath serves up fresh seafood and rice dishes (the fideuà are particularly good). The walkway around the hotel has panoramic views of Llafranc's glowing coast.
Chez TomásFRENCH€€
(%972 30 62 15; Carrer de Lluís Marquès Carbó 2; mains €14-23; h7.45-10.30pm Jun-Sep, 1-4pm & 8-11.30pm Fri-Sun Mar-May & Oct)
Tuck into Iberian pork cheek in red wine, fried rabbit, duck in port, and a host of other delights of land and sea, all prepared with a pinch of French flair at this charming restaurant tucked away from the beachfront strip.
CasamarCATALAN€€€
(%972 30 01 04; www.hotelcasamar.net; Carrer del Nero 3; mains €20-26; h1.30-3.30pm Tue-Sun, 8.30-10.30pm Tue-Sat Apr-Dec)
Winningly located on a headland overlooking the bay and harbour, this orange-hued hotel has a top-notch restaurant serving classy seafood and artfully selected ingredients in a welcoming atmosphere. There's a degustation menu, complete with cocktails, for €72. Find it via the stairs leading upwards from the southern end of the beach.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(Passeig de Cipsela; h10am-8pm)
A kiosk at the western end of the beach; opens shorter hours in low season.
8Getting There & Away
Buses from Palafrugell serve Llafranc (€1.90, 20 minutes, six daily – more in summer).
Tamariu
Pop 290
Four kilometres north up the coast from Llafranc, quiet Tamariu is a fabulous, small, crescent-shaped cove redolent with the scent of pine. Its beach has some of the most translucent waters on Spain’s Mediterranean coast.
4Sleeping & Eating
Hotel TamariuHOTEL€€
(%972 62 00 31; www.tamariu.com; Passeig del Mar 2; s/d from €102/120; hMar-Oct; aW)
A former fishermen’s tavern, the Hotel Tamariu has been family-run for four generations. It has spacious rooms in nautical navy and white, each with a balcony offering vine-draped views of this tiny beach town. Rates include breakfast.
El Clot dels MussolsSEAFOOD€€
(Passeig del Mar 2; mains €14-20)
Attached to Hotel Tamariu, El Clot dels Mussols is a top spot for seafood, with tables overlooking the turquoise waves that lash the shore.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa buses run to Palafrugell (€1.80, 15 minutes, four daily) from mid-June to mid-September only. Parking in the village is a nightmare during summer.
Begur
Pop 3994
Crowned by a 10th-century castle, with sublime coast glistening in its surrounds, Begur is one of the loveliest spots along the Costa Brava. This fairytale town, 7km northeast of Palafrugell, has a tempting array of restaurants, soothing spa hotels, and modernist mansions that add a splash of colour among the stone streets of its medieval centre.
From Begur, attractive winding roads run down to Aiguablava, Fornells, Sa Tuna and Aiguafreda, where you’ll discover pocket-sized coves hemmed in by pine trees. A bus platges (beach bus) service runs in summer from Begur’s Plaça de Forgas.
1Sights
Castell de BegurCASTLE
(h24hr)F
There is little to explore aside from the ragged ruins of this antique castle, in much the same state as when it was wrecked by Spanish troops to impede the advance of Napoleon’s army in 1810. Clearly signposted from central Begur, a steep walk leads to the ramparts, with breathtaking views over hills that roll towards the Mediterranean Sea. The Elizabeth Taylor film Suddenly, Last Summer was shot at the castle in 1959.
4Sleeping & Eating
oHotel ClassicHISTORIC HOTEL€€
(%656 906995; www.hotelclassicbegur.com; Carrer de Pi i Ralló 3; d €90-160; aW)
This truly authentic hotel, right in the core of Begur's old town, has managed to preserve original paintwork befitting the mid-19th century building it inhabits. All 10 rooms in this 1857 building are impeccably decorated in vintage styles linked to notable dates in the town's history, from stone-walled havens to Modernista chambers awash in pastel blue and coral. Access to the small but luxurious spa is included. The hotel is open year-round.
Cluc HotelBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€€
(%972 62 48 59; www.cluc.cat; Carrer del Metge Pi 8; d €149; aW)
This ravishing stone building harbours one of the trendiest, yet friendliest, places to stay in Begur's old town. Rooms are a little small, but they are decorated in pleasing vintage style. There's an honesty bar and relaxing library area too. Rates include breakfast.
Sa CaletaCATALAN€€
(Carrer de Pi i Ralló 2; mains €10-18; h1-4.30pm & 7pm-midnight Thu-Mon)
The motherly owner-chef here prefers to let her fresh seafood flavours do the talking: there are few pretensions but plenty of quality. Generously proportioned dishes include several daily fish specials, generous pans of paella and quality steaks.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 62 45 20; www.visitbegur.com; Avinguda del Onze de Setembre 7; h9am-2pm & 4-9pm Mon-Fri, from 10am Sat & Sun)
This helpful tourist office in Begur operates shorter hours in the low season.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa buses run to Barcelona (€19.50, two to 2¼ hours, three daily) via Palafrugell (€1.70, 15 minutes). There's also a Girona service (€8.35, 1½ hours, one daily on weekdays).
WORTH A TRIP
CASTELL DE PÚBOL

Castell de PúbolHISTORIC SITE
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.salvador-dali.org; Plaça de Gala Dalí; adult/concession €8/6; h10am-5pm Tue-Sun mid-Mar–Dec)
If you’re intrigued by artist Salvador Dalí, the Castell de Púbol is an essential piece of the puzzle. Between Girona and Palafrugell (22km northwest of the latter, south of the C66), this castle was Dalí’s gift to his wife and muse Gala. The Gothic and Renaissance building, with creepers tracing its walls, spiral stone staircases and a shady garden, was decorated according to Gala’s tastes. Nonetheless there are surrealist touches such as the grimacing anglerfish fountain and a sofa shaped like pouting lips.
Peratallada
Pop 430
As soon as you set foot in heart-stoppingly pretty Peratallada, there can be no doubt why this fortified medieval town is beloved by Barcelona day trippers and French tourists alike. Pale archways, cobbled squares and sandstone buildings strung with ivy create an impression of fairytale romance, though most of the town's historic buildings can only be admired from outside. The old town’s many visitors are well catered for by a plethora of good restaurants, as well as handicraft and clothing shops that beckon from laneways snaking among the crumbling walls.
4Sleeping & Eating
oEl Cau del PapibouHOTEL€€
(%972 63 47 16; http://hotelelcaudelpapibou.com; Carrer Major 10; d €100-125; hMar-Jan; W)
Colourful rooms with rustic views sit above a tapas restaurant at this friendly, characterful spot in the centre of town.
La RieraCATALAN€€
(%972 63 41 42; www.lariera.es; Plaça de les Voltes 3; mains €12-20; h1-3.30pm & 8-10.30pm Wed-Mon)
This sophisticated eatery within an esteemed old town hostal simmers up an excellent range of rice dishes, from simple seafood paella to arròs de llamàntol (lobster on rice), as well as earthy roasted meats such as slow-cooked lamb and grilled duck.
8Information
Oficina de TurismeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 64 55 21; www.forallac.cat; Plaça Castell 3; h9am-8pm; W)
Doubling as a cafe, most of the info at this little tourist office is self-service, but it has a good selection of maps and leaflets.
8Getting There & Away
Weekday buses run from Palafrugell (€3.35, 50 minutes) and Begur (€2.25, 40 minutes, two daily) to Peratallada. There is also a weekday bus from Girona (€5, 55 minutes, one daily).
Girona
Pop 97,227
Northern Catalonia’s largest city is a jewellery box of museums, galleries and Gothic churches, strung around a tangle of cobbled lanes and medieval walls. Reflections of Modernista mansions shimmer in the Riu Onyar, which demarcates the historic centre on its right bank from the gleaming commercial centre on the left.
The Roman town of Gerunda lay on Vía Augusta, the highway from Cádiz all the way to the Pyrenees. Taken from the Muslims by the Franks in the late 8th century, Girona became the capital of one of Catalonia’s most important counties, falling under the sway of Barcelona in the late 9th century.
Girona’s wealth in medieval times produced many fine Romanesque and Gothic buildings that have survived repeated attacks and sieges. There are also traces of a Jewish community that flourished in Girona until their expulsion in 1492. These cultural riches are packed into Girona’s walkable centre. With Catalonia’s most diverse nightlife and dining scene outside Barcelona, Girona makes a delicious distraction for a few days, before you’re helplessly drawn to the coast.



========NEW


Sights
oCatedral
CATHEDRAL
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.catedraldegirona.org; Plaça de la Catedral; adult/student incl Basílica de Sant Feliu €7/5, Sun free; h10am-7.30pm Apr-Oct, 10am-6.30pm Nov-Mar)
Towering over a flight of 86 steps rising from Plaça de la Catedral, this edifice is far more ancient than its billowing baroque facade suggests. Built over an old Roman forum, parts of the cathedral's foundations date from the 5th century. Today, Gothic styling – built over the Romanesque church during the 14th century – dominates, though a fine, double-columned Romanesque cloister dates from the 12th century. It's a surprisingly formidable sight to explore, but an audio guide is included in the price.
oMuseu d’Història dels Jueus de GironaMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.girona.cat/call; Carrer de la Força 8; adult/child €4/free; h10am-6pm Mon-Sat, to 2pm Sun)
Until 1492 Girona was home to Catalonia’s second most important medieval Jewish community (after Barcelona), and one of the finest Jewish quarters in the country. The Call was centred on the narrow Carrer de la Força for 600 years, until relentless persecution forced the Jews out of Spain. This excellent museum shows genuine pride in Girona’s Jewish heritage without shying away from the less salubrious aspects, such as persecution by the Inquisition and forced conversions.
Museu del CinemaMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.museudelcinema.cat; Carrer de Sèquia 1; adult/child €5/free; h10am-6pm Tue-Fri, 10am-8pm Sat, 11am-3pm Sun; c)
There is much more to this museum than the silver screen. Displays examine the reasons why humanity longs to indulge its imagination, probing the origins of visual storytelling, such as Chinese and Indian shadow puppets. It’s a whistle-stop tour taking in the invention of the camera obscura, the 19th-century debut of the Lumière brothers, and optical illusions using mirrors and trickery of light. There is a vast assortment of displays to poke, play with and peer through.
Museu d’ArtGALLERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.museuart.com; Plaça de la Catedral 12; admission €4.50; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat May-Sep, to 6pm Oct-Apr, 10am-2pm Sun)
Next door to the cathedral, in the 12th- to 16th-century Palau Episcopal, this art museum impresses with the scale and variety of its collection. Around 8500 pieces of art, mostly from this region, make up the collection, which ranges from Romanesque woodcarvings and stained-glass tables to modernist paintings of the city by Mela Mutter and early-20th-century sculptures by influential Rafael Masó i Valentí.
Monestir de Sant Pere de GalligantsMONASTERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.mac.cat; Carrer de Santa Llúcia; adult/child €4.50/3.50; h10am-6pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
This beautiful 11th- and 12th-century Romanesque Benedectine monastery has a sublime bell tower and a lovely cloister featuring otherworldly animals and mythical creatures on the capitals of its double columns – there are some great ones in the church too. It's also home to the Museu Arqueològic ( GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Santa Llúcia; incl with Monestir entry; h10am-6pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun). Weekday opening hours from June to September run until 7pm.
Passeig ArqueològicWALLS
(Passeig de la Muralla; MAP GOOGLE MAP ; h10am-8pm)F
A walk along Girona’s medieval walls is a wonderful way to appreciate the city landscape from above. There are several points of access, the most popular being across the street from the Banys Àrabs, where steps lead up into some heavenly gardens where town and plants merge into one organic masterpiece. The southernmost part of the wall ends right near Plaça de Catalunya.
Museu d’Història de GironaMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.girona.cat/museuciutat; Carrer de la Força 27; adult/student/child €4/2/free; h10.30am-5.30pm Tue-Sat, to 1.30pm Sun)
This museum’s setting within 18th-century cloisters lends an appropriately antique feel to your journey from Roman Girona to the present day. Standout displays include an exhibition illuminating the 3rd- to 4th-century Can Pau Birol mosaic, which depicts a lively circus scene with charioteers, and an explanation of the siege of Girona by Napoleonic troops. Many pieces on display are copies rather than originals, making this a place to unpeel the layers of Girona's history rather than goggle at sculpture and art.
Basílica de Sant FeliuCHURCH
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Plaça de Sant Feliu; adult/student incl Catedral €7/5, Sun free; h10am-5.30pm Mon-Sat, 1-5.30pm Sun)
Just downhill from the cathedral is Girona’s second great church, with its landmark truncated bell tower. The nave is majestic with Gothic ribbed vaulting, while St Narcissus, the patron of the city, is venerated in an enormous marble-and-jasper, late-baroque side chapel. Underneath his reclining form you see scenes from his life including the conversion of women, martyrdom and expelling of an evil genie. To the side is the Gothic sepulchre, dating from 1328, that previously held his remains. A decent audio guide tour is included with admission.
Banys ÀrabsRUINS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.banysarabs.cat; Carrer de Ferràn el Catòlic; adult/child €2/1; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat, to 2pm Sun Apr-Sep, 10am-2pm daily Oct-Mar)
Although modelled on earlier Muslim and Roman bathhouses, the Banys Àrabs are a finely preserved, 12th-century Christian affair in Romanesque style. The baths contain an apodyterium (changing room), followed by a frigidarium and tepidarium (with respectively cold and warm water) and a caldarium (a kind of sauna) heated by an underfloor furnace.
GIRONAMUSEUS CARD

The GironaMuseus card (www.gironamuseus.cat) covers six Girona museums including the Museu d’Història dels Jueus de Girona, Museu d'Art, Museu d’Història de Girona, Monestir de Sant Pere de Galligants and the Museu del Cinema. It provides useful savings – you pay the full entrance fee at the first museum you visit and then get a 50% discount at the remainder. It’s valid for six months.
4Sleeping
The most atmospheric accommodation choices are in the old town, and there's a good sprinkling of apartments for rent and hostels too. Don't rule out digs on the west bank of the river, Girona's commercial side: it may not be as charming as the east bank, but there are some good quality hotels within walking distance of the best sights.
Pensió ViladomatPENSION€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %972 20 31 76; www.pensioviladomat.cat; Carrer dels Ciutadans 5; s/d without bathroom €24/40, d/tr with bathroom €50/68; W)
This is one of the nicest of the cheaper pensiones (small hotels) scattered about the southern end of the old town. It has simple, modernised, well-maintained rooms.
oMil EstrellesBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€
(%972 59 67 07; www.milestrelles.com; La Bastida, Borgonyà; d €110-179; paW)S
Stargazers and lovers shouldn't miss Mil Estrelles, a unique hotel 16km north of Girona. Fabulously combining old stone and modern plastic, it offers lovably rustic rooms in a noble historical farmhouse, as well as cute chambers in clear plastic bubbles dotted about the garden, perfect for spotting constellations from the comfort of your double bed.
oBells OficisB&B€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 81 70; www.bellsoficis.com; Carrer dels Germans Busquets 2; r incl breakfast €55-91; aW)
A lovingly restored, 19th-century flat just by the Rambla in the heart of Girona makes a stylish and ultra-welcoming place to stop. It's the former home of Catalan artist Jaume Busquets i Mollera, and retains period details in each of the five individually styled rooms. Some rooms share bathrooms, while those with en suite have no bathroom door. The largest room has ample room for four people.
Casa CúndaroBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 35 83; www.casacundaro.com; Pujada de la Catedral 7; d/q €60/90, apt €70-90; aW)
The understated exterior of this medieval Jewish house hides five sumptuous rooms and four self-catering apartments – all combining original exposed stone walls and antique doors with modern luxuries. You couldn't wish for a more characterful base. Its location right next to the cathedral is either a boon or a bane, depending on whether you enjoy the sound of church bells. Reserve well in advance.
oHotel Llegendes de Girona CatedralHOTEL€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 09 05; www.llegendeshotel.com; Carrer Portal de la Barca 4; d €137-299; paW)
Each of the 15 rooms within this restored 18th-century building has been decorated according to a different Catalan legend or theme. It's a pleasing fusion of ancient and modern, with comfortable beds and huge rain showers. Some rooms have gorgeous cathedral views. Book ahead for the decadent 'Eros suite', boasting a tantric sex sofa (with a handy instruction manual).
GIRONA'S JEWS

In its 13th-century heyday, Girona was home to one of Catalonia's largest Jewish communities, who lived by and large peacefully alongside their Christian neighbours, gaining in prosperity and contributing to fields as diverse as astronomy and medicine.
Nevertheless the Jewish community came under attack, especially during the later crusades of the 12th and 13th centuries. The Call – a maze of tiny alleys, surrounded by a stone wall – went from refuge to ghetto as Jews were gradually confined to their tiny corner of the town. Especially stomach-churning were the ‘Disputes’, rigged debates intended to ridicule pillars of the Jewish community against the supposedly superior logic of Christians. The spin of the day reported that these debates led to mass conversions, but the likelier story is that Jews converted out of heavy pressure and fear. Slander against Jews became increasingly grotesque, with tales of murdered Christian infants.
Things came to a head during a riot in 1391, when a mob broke into the ghetto, massacring 40 residents. Since the Jews were still under the king’s protection, troops were sent in and the survivors were confined to the Galligants Tower ‘for their own safety’ for 17 weeks, only to find their houses and possessions destroyed when they came out. Many converted to Christianity during the 15th century. In 1492 those who remained were expelled from Spain, ending a story that had been over 1500 years in the making.
5Eating
+CubCAFE€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.mescub.cat; Carrer de l'Albereda 15; mains €10-14; h8am-9pm Mon-Thu, 8am-midnight Fri, 9am-midnight Sat; Wv)
This trendy cafe-bar is as good for a takeaway coffee as it is for a full-blown nosh on speciality burgers and vegie crêpes. Thirst-quenchers include fresh fruit-juice combos and shakes, and they have a range of Scottish, German and other beers, plus local Moska homebrew.
NuCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 52 30; www.nurestaurant.cat; Carrer d'Abeuradors 4; mains €16-18; h1.15-3.45pm & 8.15-10.45pm Mon-Sat; W)
Sleek and confident, this handsome contemporary old-town spot has innovative, top-notch plates prepared in view by the friendly team. Flavour combinations keep things interesting: sample tuna tataki with red fruit glaze, tandoori pork cheeks with mango, and orange flower crème brulée. Great value for this quality.
OcciFUSION€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 71 54; www.restaurantocci.com; Carrer dels Mercaders 3; mains €15-23; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm, closed Wed)
With elegant contemporary styling and quality glassware and service, Occi has many elements of a pricier place but remains accessible and welcoming. The menu incorporates Catalan, French and Asian influences, such as squid lavished with romesco (pepper and nut) sauce and bite-sized tuna heaped with wasabi. Reserve ahead as the day it closes can vary.
L’AlqueriaSPANISH, CATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 18 82; www.restaurantalqueria.com; Carrer de la Ginesta 8; mains €14-20; h1-4pm Tue-Sun, 9-11pm Wed-Sat)
This smart minimalist arrocería serves the finest arròs negre (rice cooked in cuttlefish ink) and arròs a la catalan in the city, as well as around 20 other superbly executed rice dishes, including paellas. Eat your heart out, Valencia! It’s wise to book ahead for dinner, though it also offers takeaway.
oEl Celler de Can RocaCATALAN€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 21 57; www.cellercanroca.com; Calle Can Sunyer 48; degustation menus €150-180; h1-4pm & 8.30-11pm Wed-Sat, 8.30-11pm Sun)
Ever-changing avant-garde takes on Catalan dishes have catapulted El Celler to global fame. Named the best restaurant in the world in 2015 by The World's 50 Best, each year brings new innovations from molecular gastronomy to multi-sensory food-art interplay to sci-fi dessert trolleys, all with mama's home cooking as the core inspiration.
WHAT'S COOKING IN CATALONIA?

Cuina Catalana rivals Basque cuisine as Spain’s best, drawing ingredients from mar i muntanya (sea and mountain). It has come a long way since medieval recipes for roast cat with garlic: its essence now lies in its sauces for meat and fish. There are five main types: sofregit, of fried onion, tomato and garlic; samfaina, sofregit plus red pepper and aubergine or zucchini (courgette); picada, based on ground almonds, usually with garlic, parsley, pine nuts or hazelnuts, and sometimes breadcrumbs; allioli, garlic pounded with olive oil and egg yolk to make a mayonnaise; and romesco, an almond, tomato, olive oil, garlic and vinegar sauce, also used as a salad dressing.
Calçots, which are a type of long spring onion, are delicious as a starter with romesco sauce and are in season in late winter/early spring. This is when Catalans get together for a calçotada, the local version of a barbecue.
Catalans seem to live on pa amb tomàquet, bread slices rubbed with tomato, olive oil and garlic.
6Drinking & Nightlife
Ham SessionWINE BAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; %682 189023; http://donjamon.cat; Carrer del Riu Güell 18; h9.30pm-2am Thu-Sat)
Wine, late nights and uncompromisingly good Iberico ham: together at last. Nocturnal grazers will find heaven at this gourmet-focused wine bar, which pairs fine wines with a seemingly endless buffet of local cheeses and freshly carved ham. Book ahead to assure your spot at seats surrounding wine barrels.
Lola CafèBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; monapartgrup.com/lolacafe; Carrer de la Força 7; h7pm-3am Wed-Sat)
Baroque-style gilt mirrors and intimate tables for two make this a sultry night among the cobbled lanes of Girona's medieval town. Dance into the night to live rumba (Wed and Thu evenings) or their regular mash-up of 80s and 90s pop, and stay hydrated with caipirinhas, mojitos and more.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 22 65 75; www.girona.cat/turisme; Rambla de la Llibertat 1; h9am-8pm Mon-Fri, 9am-2pm & 4-8pm Sat, 9am-2pm Sun)
Multilingual and helpful tourist information spot by the river.
8Getting There & Away
AIR
Girona-Costa Brava airport (www.girona-airport.net), a Ryanair hub, is located 11km south of the centre, with Sagalés (www.sagales.com) connecting it to Girona’s main bus/train station (€2.75, 30 minutes, hourly), as well as Barcelona’s Estació del Nord (one way/return €16/25, 1¼ hours). Other direct bus services run to various Costa Brava destinations, including Lloret de Mar (€10, 35 minutes). A taxi (%672 081830, 636 431300) to central Girona costs around €27 during the day and €35 at night.
BUS
Teisa (www.teisa-bus.com) runs from Girona to Besalú (€4.10 to €4.70, one hour, four to 12 daily) and Olot (€7.45 to €8.50, 1½ hours, four to 15 daily). Sarfa (www.sarfa.com) serves Cadaqués (€10.80, 1¾ hours, one on weekdays) and other coastal destinations. The bus station ( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 21 23 19; Plaça d'Espanya) is next to the train station.
TRAIN
Girona is on the train line between Barcelona (€11.25 to €16.20, 40 minutes to 1¼ hours, up to 24 daily), Figueres (€4.10 to €5.45, 30 minutes, two to three daily) and Portbou, on the French border (€6.15 to €8.25, one hour, one daily). There are several through trains to France and beyond.
8Getting Around
The experience of parking in Girona is alluded to in the Book of Revelations (probably). Underground car parks are demonically expensive, while free places are snapped up quickly. There is some free parking around Carrer Josep Morató i Grau, just south of the historic centre. If you're desperate for somewhere to dump the car, there's free parking galore off the Carrer de Sant Gregori roundabout near El Celler de Can Roca, a 30-minute walk northwest of the centre.
L’Estartit & the Illes Medes
L’Estartit, 6km east of Torroella de Montgrí, has a long, wide beach of fine sand and a flashy St-Tropez vibe along its palm-lined boardwalk. But it's the diving that draws travellers to this pretty stretch of Catalonia's Mediterranean coast. The protected Illes Medes, a spectacular group of rocky islets barely 1km offshore, are home to some of the most abundant marine life in coastal Spain.
2Activities
Illes MedesDIVING
The range of depths (down to 50m) and underwater cavities and tunnels contribute much to the allure of the Illes Medes, seven islets off L'Estartit beach. Since being gazetted as a reserva natural submarina in 1983, marine life has thrived here, making this archipelago Spain's most popular destination for snorkellers and divers. Kiosks by the harbour, at the northern end of L'Estartit beach, offer snorkelling and glass-bottomed boat trips to the islands.
4Sleeping
oLes MedesCAMPGROUND€
(%972 75 18 05; www.campinglesmedes.com; Paratge Camp de l’Arbre, L'Estartit; site €21.70 plus per adult €9.30, bungalows from €93.50; pWs)
This is one of Catalonia's best campsites, open year-round and set in a leafy location 2km south of L'Estartit and 800m from the seaside. There is a sauna as well as three pools (one for grown-ups only), bike rental, laundry facilities and even massages available.
Hotel Les IllesHOTEL€€
(%972 75 12 39; www.hotellesilles.com; Carrer de Les Illes 55, L’Estartit; s/d/tr incl breakfast €78/128/139; hmid-Mar–mid-Nov; aW)
This white, bright, family-friendly divers’ hang-out behind the harbour is a top pick if you want to venture beneath the waves. Rooms are functional though unremarkable; the best reason to stay is to make use of their diving centre. In operation for more than 30 years, it's a good option for team excursions, diving lessons and gear hire. Full board is available and some rooms sleep up to five guests.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 75 19 10; www.visitestartit.com; Passeig Marítim, L’Estartit; h9am-1pm & 3-6pm Mon-Fri, 10am-2pm Sat & Sun)
At the northern end of Passeig Marítim, this tourist office has lists of L’Estartit’s scuba diving outfits. Opening hours vary seasonally.
8Getting There & Away
L’Estartit is easily reached from Torroella de Montgrí (€1.70, 10 minutes, 16 daily on weekends, five daily on weekends) via the Ampsa bus network.
L'Escala
Pop 10,143
At the southern end of the 16km Golf de Roses is L’Escala, a resort town with a difference. Yes, summer brings sun-worshippers to amble along its sea front, lick ice cream on sandy beaches and clink glasses of tinto de verano (a summer punch of red wine and sparkling water). But merry L’Escala is also the access point to the Greco-Roman site Empúries, set in a northerly neighbourhood 1km beyond the bustling town. This sprawling ancient city, behind a near-virgin beach facing the Mediterranean, is worthy of exploration both for its remarkable ruins and picturesque setting.
1Sights
oEmpúriesARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE
(%972 77 02 08; www.mac.cat; adult/child €5/free; h10am-8pm Jun-Sep, to 5pm Oct-May, closed Mon Nov-Feb)
Exploring this evocative archaeological site and its accompanying museum allows you to immerse yourself in a strategic Greek, and later Roman, trading port. A lively audio guide commentary (included in the price) unravels the history of the Greek town in the lower part of the site, before leading you to the Roman town, with its reconstructed forum. The museum exhibits the top finds, including a statue of Asclepius, god of medicine, dating to the 2nd century BC.
4Sleeping & Eating
Can MiquelHOTEL€€
(%972 77 14 52; www.canmiquel.com; Platja de Montgó; s/d incl breakfast €104/130; hMar-Nov; paWs)
Four kilometres southeast of central L'Escala behind a pretty cove beach, this rather severe-looking building features plain rooms and top-class staff. There's a good pool area, tennis courts, and a fish restaurant.
Hostal Spa EmpúriesBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€€
(%972 77 02 07; www.hostalempuries.com; Platja del Portitxol; d from €166; paW)S
This stylish year-round hotel next to the Roman ruins fronts a sandy splash of ocean. Some rooms are beach-coloured and the mosaic bathrooms clearly take their inspiration from the ruins; the rooms in the new wing, with rain showers and enormous beds, are particularly comfortable. The two restaurants specialise in creative Mediterranean and seafood dishes using local produce.
oLa GrutaFUSION€€€
(%972 77 62 11; www.restaurantlagruta.com; Carrer del Pintor Enric Serra 15; 3-course menu €29; h12.30-3.30pm Mon-Sat, 8pm-10.30pm Tue-Sat)
A fusion of French and Spanish flavours, spiced with occasional Indian flair, fill plates at this innovative spot. Think steak with light tandoori spices, truffled oeuf cocotte (French-style baked egg) and duck marinaded in ginger, plus patisserie items and a rainbow of iced desserts.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 77 06 03; www.lescala.cat; Plaça de les Escoles 1; h9am-1pm & 4-7pm Mon-Fri, 10am-1pm & 4-7pm Sat, 10am-1pm Sun)
L'Escala's tourist office is conveniently located down the street from where the bus drops visitors. It operates shorter hours during the low season.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa has daily buses from Barcelona (€21.70, three hours, three daily), Girona (€6.40, one hour, two to five daily) and Figueres (€4.95, one hour, two to four daily). Arriving in town, buses will drop you on Avinguda Girona, just down the street from the tourist office.
WORTH A TRIP
SANT MARTÍ D'EMPÚRIES

Size isn't everything. Though minuscule, walled Sant Martí d'Empúries impresses with its glorious shores and medieval history. Until 1079 it was the seat of Empúries county before its vulnerability to pirate attacks prompted a power shift. These days it makes a wonderful excursion from L'Escala (5km south) or Castelló d’Empúries (12km north). Sand beaches extend just beyond the walls of its historical centre. The main square, flanked by a broad sandstone church, is packed with more than its fair share of excellent restaurants.
8Getting There & Away
Rodalies trains run from Barcelona's Estació Sants to Sant Sadurní (€4.10, 45 minutes, half-hourly). By car, take the A2 north from Barcelona follow signs west at Martorell.
Castelló d’Empúries
Pop 11,473
This town once presided over Empúries, a medieval Catalan county that maintained a large degree of independence up to the 14th century. Modern Castelló d’Empúries maintains the imperious aura of a former capital, but these days its cobbled lanes are trodden less by counts and more by affable locals and the odd tourist.
Traces of Castelló d’Empúries’ history can be found in the impressive Basílica de Santa María and well-preserved Gothic Convent de Sant Domènec. The town also makes a superb base for lovers of the outdoors. Nearby Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’Empordà is superb for bird watching and has a number of easy hikes, while wind-blown (but otherwise peaceful) beaches lie just 5km east.
1Sights
Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’EmpordàPARK
(GIV6216 Sant Pere Pescador–Castelló d’Empúries Km 4.2; parking motorbike or car €5, van €10; hEl Cortalet information centre 9.30am-2pm & 3.30-7pm high season, to 4pm low season)
The remnants of the mighty marshes that once covered the whole coastal plain here are preserved in this natural park, a key site for migrating birds. The March–May and August–October migration periods bring big increases in the numbers of wading birds. Keen twitchers may drop their binoculars in the excitement of glimpsing flamingo, bee eater, glossy ibis, spoonbill, rare black stork and more than 300 other species passing through the area (some 90 of which nest here).
Ecomuseu-FarineraMUSEUM
(www.ecomuseu-farinera.org; Carrer de Sant Francesc 5; adult/under 14 €3.70/2.65; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 10.30am-1.30pm Sun)
In its heyday, this farinera (flour factory) was producing 20,000kg of the white stuff each day. Even if milling innovations aren't your thing, a wander in this museum takes you on a surprisingly diverting journey from sheaf to loaf, with huge turbines to gawp at, plus a hypnotic soundtrack of hydraulics. There is a kids' trail to guide young visitors around the museum.
4Sleeping & Eating
oHotel Casa ClaraHOSTAL€€
(%972 25 02 15; www.hostalcasaclara.com; Plaça de les Monges; s/d/tr €65/75/100; paW)
Genial service and quaint, cosy rooms make this colourful hostal a splendid midrange option right in the heart of old-town Castelló d'Empúries. All seven spacious, tiled rooms feature natural light, an individual colour scheme and comfortable beds. There is a pleasant lounge and terrace area with board games and books, and the attached restaurant features a changing menu of flavoursome Catalan fare (three courses €15).
Hotel MonedaHOTEL€€€
(%972 15 86 02; www.hoteldelamoneda.com; Plaça de la Moneda; d €88-276; hMar-Nov; paWs)
This 18th-century luxury mansion makes an enticing couples' retreat. Low-slung medieval archways provide an intimate old-world atmosphere, while rooms are awash in bright primary colours. There's a little swimming pool, Andalusian-style Jacuzzi and sexy touches such as cava (sparkling wine) on arrival and slippers to pad around the enormous rooms. Leave the kids at home for this one.
Les VoltesCATALAN€€
(Placa dels Homes 4; mains €12-15; h1-3.30pm Wed-Sun, 8.30pm-10.30pm Wed-Sat)
As pleasant for a glass of tinto de verano (red wine and soda) as for a full-blown feast of barbecued pork, Les Voltes spreads from a cavernous stone-walled interior onto atmospheric Placa dels Homes. Service is cordial, tablecloths are white, but the outdoor terrace is casual enough to stay for a snack.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa runs buses to Figueres (€1.70, 15 minutes, 18 daily on weekdays, one on weekends), Cadaqués (€4.20, 50 minutes, six weekdays, one weekends) and Barcelona’s Estació del Nord (€20.75, two hours, two on weekdays, one on weekends).
Cadaqués
Pop 2820
Cadaqués gleams above the cobalt-blue waters of a rocky bay on Catalonia’s most easterly outcrop. This whitewashed village owes its allure in part to its windswept pebble beaches and meandering lanes, and the easy-going atmosphere that draws throngs of summer visitors. But it’s the artist Salvador Dalí who truly gave Cadaqués its sparkle.
The artist spent family holidays here during his youth, and lived much of his later life at nearby Port Lligat. Thanks to Dalí and other luminaries, such as his friend Federico García Lorca, Cadaqués pulled in a celebrity crowd and still does. A 1929 visit by the poet Paul Éluard and his Russian wife, Gala, caused an earthquake in Dalí’s life: he ran off to Paris with Gala (who was to become his lifelong obsession and, later, his wife) and joined the Surrealist movement.
Summer in Cadaqués is very busy, so an advance booking can make or break a trip. September is less crowded, but tourist amenities begin to slumber from mid-October. There can also be sea storms at this time of year, bringing autumn breaks to an abrupt and soggy halt.
1Sights
Casa Museu DalíMUSEUM
(%972 25 10 15; www.salvador-dali.org; adult/under 8yr €11/free; h10.30am-6pm Tue-Sun, closed Jan–mid-Feb)
Located by a peaceful cove in Port Lligat, a tiny fishing settlement a 20-minute walk from Cadaqués, the Casa Museu Dalí was the residence and sanctuary of Salvador Dalí. This splendid whitewashed structure is a mishmash of cottages and sunny terraces, linked together by narrow labyrinthine corridors and containing an assortment of offbeat furnishings. Access is by semi-guided tour only. It's essential to book ahead, by phone or via the website.
Museu de CadaquésMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Narcís Monturiol 15; adult/child €4/3; h10am-8pm daily Jul-Sep, 10.30am-1.30pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat Apr-Jun & Oct)
Salvador Dalí often features strongly in the temporary exhibitions displayed here, as do his contemporaries, also connected to Cadaqués, such as Picasso. It opens roughly Easter to October, but this depends on the yearly exhibition.
rBeaches
Cadaqués' main beach, and several others along the nearby coast, are small, with more pebbles than sand, but their picturesqueness and beautiful blue waters make up for that. Overlooking Platja Llané, to the south of the town centre, is Dalí's parents' holiday home. All the beaches around here experience strong winds, so caution is recommended. Even in high summer, swimming can be far from relaxing.
WORTH A TRIP
THE COSTA BRAVA WAY

The 255km-long stretch of cliffs, coves, rocky promontories and pine groves that make up the signposted Costa Brava Way, stretching from Blanes to Colliure in France, unsurprisingly offers some of the best walks in Catalonia, ranging from gentle rambles to high-octane scrambles (or one long, demanding hike if you want to do the whole thing). For the most part, the trail follows the established GR92, but also includes a number of coastal deviations.
A choice route is Cadaqués to the Cap de Creus Lighthouse (2½ hours), a relatively easy walk that begins in the centre of Cadaqués, then passes Portlligat, continuing along windswept, scrub-covered, rocky ground past several isolated beaches before it reaches the lighthouse.
4Sleeping
Hotel Llane PetitHOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 25 10 20; www.llanepetit.com; Carrer del Dr Bartomeus 37; d €118-191; hmid-Mar–Oct; paWs)
Thirty-seven rooms fitted out in the bright, nautical style beloved of Cadaqués fill this four-storey place overlooking a pocket-sized pebbled beach. The location is splendid and most rooms have a generous balcony to sit on. Breakfast (€12) and parking (€10 to €15) cost extra. Prices drop by up to 30% outside high season.
Hostal VehíHOSTAL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 25 84 70; www.hostalvehi.com; Carrer de l’Església 6; d with bathroom €60-90; hMar-Nov; aW)
In the heart of the old town, this family-run guesthouse has clean-as-a-whistle rooms with homey touches such as floral duvets and wood furnishings. Superior doubles are vast, with pleasant views over Cadaqués' coral-coloured rooftops. It’s a pain to walk to if you have a lot of luggage (and cars can't access this part of the old town), but it's the best midrange deal in town. Book way ahead for July and August.
L'Horta d'en RaholaBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 25 10 49; www.hortacadaques.com; Carrer Sant Vicens 1; d €125-200; hMar-Dec; paW)
Just by the roundabout at the entrance to the village, this luminous family-run place is a characterful conversion of a 17th-century farmhouse, with a garden growing vegetables and fruit. The seven rooms, all different, are light and bright with a marine feel. There's a restaurant, personal service is excellent and you're made to feel very welcome.
5Eating
Es BaluardSEAFOOD€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 25 81 83; www.esbaluard-cadaques.net; Carrer de la Riba Nemesi Llorens; mains €16-22; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm)
There may be roe deer carpaccio and salt-sprinkled grilled asparagus on the menu, but the family behind Es Baluard clearly worships at the throne of Poseidon. Fish dishes such as anchoas de Cadaqués (anchovies from Cadaqués) and suquet de peix (local fish stew) dominate the menu. Plus there is a formidable selection of desserts including syrup-soaked figs and cream cheese ice cream with orange marmalade.
Casa NunSEAFOOD€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 25 88 56; Plaça des Portitxó 6; mains €15-25; h12.30-3.30pm & 7.30-11pm daily Apr-Oct, Sat & Sun Nov-Mar)
Head for the cute upstairs dining area or take one of the few tables outside overlooking the port. Everything is prepared with care, from the seafood dominating the menu to generous steaks and a little dessert selection with tarta de limón and home-made flans.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 25 83 15; www.visitcadaques.org; Carrer del Cotxe 2; h9am-1pm & 3-6pm Mon-Thu, to 7pm Fri & Sat, 10am-1pm Sun)
Near where the main road meets the water, this tourist info place opens longer hours in the high season.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa buses connect Cadaqués to Barcelona (€24.50, 2¾ hours, one to two weekdays, plus weekends in summer), Figueres (€5.50, one hour, four weekdays) via Castelló d’Empúries, and Girona (€10.80, 1¾ hours, one weekdays).
WORTH A TRIP
MONESTIR DE SANT PERE DE RODES

Monestir de Sant Pere de RodesMONASTERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 38 75 59; adult/under 8s €4.50/free, Tue free; h10am-7pm Tue & Thu-Sat, to 8pm Wed, 10am-2.30pm Tue-Sun Oct-May)
Combine views of a deep-blue Mediterranean and the menacing peaks of the Pyrenees with a spectacular piece of Romanesque architecture. The resulting sensory overload is the Monestir de Sant Pere de Rodes, which sits 500m up in the hills southwest of El Port de la Selva. Founded in the 9th century, it became the most powerful monastery in the county of Empúries. The great triple-naved, barrel-vaulted basilica is flanked by the square Torre de Sant Miquel bell tower and a two-level cloister.
Cap de Creus
Cap de Creus is the most easterly point of the Spanish mainland and is a place of sublime, rugged beauty, battered by the merciless tramuntana wind and reachable by a lonely, 8km-long road that winds its way through the moonscapes. With a steep, rocky coastline indented by coves of turquoise water, it’s an especially wonderful place to be at dawn or sunset.
The odd-shaped rocks, barren plateaux and deserted shorelines that litter Dalí’s famous paintings were not just a product of his fertile imagination. This is the landscape that inspired the artist, which he described as a ‘grandiose geological delirium’. See if you can find the huge rock that morphed into the subject of his painting The Great Masturbator, half-way between the main road and the lighthouse at the top.
8Getting There & Away
Cap de Creus is most easily accessed by car, along an 8km winding gravel road from Cadaqués via Port Lligat.
WORTH A TRIP
CENTRE DE REPRODUCCIÓ DE TORTUGUES DE L'ALBERA

Centre de Reproducció de Tortugues de l'AlberaWILDLIFE RESERVE
(%972 55 22 45; www.tortugues.cat; Garriguella; admission €6; h10am-1pm & 3-5pm Tue-Sat, 10am-1pm Sun late Mar-Oct; #)
For 21 years, this little wildlife sanctuary has been a haven for Hermann's tortoises, and a force for educating people about these little armoured tanks of the Pyrenees. There's an introductory film (Catalana, Spanish, English, French or German) explaining menaces to the region's tortoises, but the biggest thrill is a stroll around the boardwalk outside, to peep at scores of critters ambling among rocks and flower beds. The sanctuary is just north of Garriguella, a teeny town 15km northeast of Figueres.
Figueres
Pop 45,444
Twelve kilometres inland from Catalonia's glistening Golf de Roses lies Figueres, birthplace of Salvador Dalí and now home to the artist’s flamboyant theatre-museum. Although Dalí’s career took him to Madrid, Barcelona, Paris and the USA, Figueres remained close to his heart; so in the 1960s and '70s he created the extraordinary Teatre-Museu Dalí – a monument to surrealism and a legacy that outshines any other Spanish artist, both in terms of popularity and sheer flamboyance. Whatever your feelings about this complex, egocentric man, this museum is worth every cent and minute you can spare.
Beyond this star attraction, busy Figueres has a couple of interesting museums, pleasant shopping streets around Carrer de Peralada, and a whopping 18th-century fortress. It’s well worth staying to see the city breathe after Dalí day-trippers board their buses at sundown.
DALÍ

One of the 20th century’s most recognisable icons, Salvador Dalí (1904–89) could have had the term ‘larger-than-life’ invented for him. He then would probably have decorated it with pink pineapples.
Born in Figueres, Dalí’s surrealist trajectory through the often-serious landscape of 20th-century Spain brought him into contact and collaboration with figures such as Pablo Picasso, Luís Buñuel, Federico García Lorca and (controversially) Franco. A raft of foreign celebrities flocked to be seen in his extravagant company. He turned his hand to everything from film-making to architecture to literature.
Self-consciously eccentric and a constant source of memorable soundbites, he was nevertheless in some ways a conservative figure and devout Catholic. His long relationship with his Russian wife Gala provided the stable foundation that his whirligig life revolved around.
The celebrity, the extraordinarily prolific output and, let’s face it, the comedy moustache tend to pull focus from the fact that he was an artist of the highest calibre. In his paintings, Dalí’s surrealism is often far more profound than it seems at first glance. The floppy clocks of his most famous work, The Persistence of Memory, are interpreted by some as a reference to the flexibility of time proposed by Einstein. His Christ of St John of the Cross combines expert composition, symbol-laden Renaissance-style imagery and a nostalgic, almost elegiac view of the Catalan coast that he so loved.
1Sights
oTeatre-Museu DalíMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.salvador-dali.org; Plaça de Gala i Salvador Dalí 5; adult/child under 9yr incl Museu de l’Empordà €12/free; h9am-8pm Tue-Sun Jul-Sep, 10.30am-6pm Tue-Sun Oct-Jun, closed Mon)
The first name that comes into your head when you lay your eyes on this red castle-like building, topped with giant eggs and stylised Oscar-like statues and studded with plaster-covered croissants, is Dalí. An entirely appropriate final resting place for the master of surrealism, it has assured his immortality. Exhibits within these walls range from enormous installations - like Taxi Plujós (Rainy Taxi), an early Cadillac, surmounted by statues – to the more discreet, such as a tiny mysterious room with a mirrored flamingo.
Castell de Sant FerranFORT
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.lesfortalesescatalanes.info; adult/child €3/free; h10.30am-6pm Apr–mid-Jul, 10.30am-8pm mid-Jul–mid-Sep, 10.30am-3pm Oct-Mar)
This sturdy 18th-century fortress commands the surrounding plains from a low hill 1km northwest of the centre. The complex is a wonder of military engineering: it sprawls over 32 hectares, with the capacity for 6000 men to march within its walls and snooze in military barracks that are on display today. The admission fee includes a clanking audio guide (nearly as old as the castle) to help navigate the site. Book ahead for group guided tours (€10 to €15 per person). Opening hours vary seasonally.
Museu del JoguetMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.mjc.cat; Carrer de Sant Pere 1; adult/child €6/free; h10am-6pm Tue-Sat, 11am-2pm Sun, closed Jan)
This museum has more than 3500 toys from throughout the ages – from the earliest board games involving coloured stones to ball-in-a-cup to intricate dolls’ houses to 1920s dolls with baleful stares that may haunt your dreams to Catalonia- and Valencia-made religious processions of tiny figures. It's a mesmerising display, with plenty to amuse the kids... that is, unless you're the kind to associate blank-eyed Victorian dolls with horror movies. Admission is half-price if you flash a Teatre-Museu Dalí ticket.
Museu de l’EmpordàMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.museuemporda.org; La Rambla 2; adult/child €4/free; h11am-8pm Tue-Sat, to 2pm Sun)
Across four floors, this local museum time travels from ancient amphorae to 7th-century sculptures to rotating installations of contemporary art. The region's culture and history are presented in a rather fragmented way, but it's an enjoyable romp. The 17th-century religious art is especially worthy of attention. There are signs in Spanish and Catalan, plus explanation on laminated cards in English and French. Admission is free with a Teatre-Museu Dalí ticket.
VISITING THE TEATRE-MUSEU DALÍ

The Teatre-Museu Dalí is Spain's most visited museum outside Madrid, so it's worthwhile double-checking the opening hours (it's closed on Mondays) and reserving tickets online in advance. In August the museum opens at night from 10pm to 12.30am (admission €13, bookings essential).
The biggest crowds arrive during weekends and on public holidays. Arrive early to avoid long queues.
4Sleeping
Hostel FigueresHOSTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %630 680575; www.hostelfigueres.com; Carrer dels Tints 22; dm/d €19/59; W)
This fresh-faced newcomer to Figueres' accommodation scene opened in June 2015 and is exactly the backpacker hideaway the city sorely needed. The 14-bed dorm is clean and airy, with fans to keep things cool. Staff positively fizz with recommendations, plus they can arrange bike hire. The hostel is fitted with a communal kitchen, lounge room, lockers, hand-washing station for clothes, and there's towel hire (€1).
Hotel RondaHOTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 50 39 11; www.hotelrondafigueres.com; Avinguda Salvador Dali 17; s/d/tr from €42/55/72; paW)
Located 2.5km south of the centre, Hotel Ronda is best suited to travellers with their own wheels. For drivers it's perfectly positioned on the main road for day trips out of town to Girona or L'Estartit and the coast. Rooms have a business feel but are very comfortable with near-blackout curtains. Underground parking is included in the price, a true blessing in traffic-choked Figueres.
oHotel DuránHOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 50 12 50; www.hotelduran.com; Carrer de Lasauca 5; d from €75; paW)
For absolute immersion in the Dalí legend, a stay at this mid-19th-century hotel is a must. The artist and his wife were frequent guests here, and there's a fitting blend of old-style elegance with contemporary design and surrealist touches. Rooms are modern and great value, while the restaurant has the opulence of a royal banquet hall.
5Eating
Sidrería Txot’sCATALAN, BASQUE€
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.sidreriatxots.com; Avinguda Salvador Dalí 114; mains €10; hnoon-midnight; W)
Perch on a wooden seat and watch your Basque cider poured from on high from the barrel – the way it’s supposed to be – before tucking into cold and hot pintxos (Basque tapas), tasty burgers, cured meats, cheeses and salads, as well as dishes such as chorizo in cider and L’Escala anchovies on toast. The kitchen's open all afternoon – handy for a post-Dalí meal.
El MotelCATALAN€€€
(Hotel Empordà; GOOGLE MAP ; %972 50 05 62; www.elmotel.cat; Avinguda Salvador Dalí i Domènech 170; tasting menu €39.70; h7.30-11am, 12.45-3.45pm & 9-11pm; pW)
Jaume Subirós, the chef and owner of this hotel-restaurant on a busy road 1km north of the centre, is a seminal figure of the transition from traditional Catalan home cooking to the polished, innovative affair it is today. Highlights are such dishes as sea urchins from Cadaqués, cod with truffle and calf’s cheek in red wine. There are also appealing rooms in which to sleep off the gastronomic indulgence (single €94, double €109, suite €140).
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 50 31 55; http://visitfigueres.cat; Plaça del Sol; h9.30am-2pm & 4-6pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun & Mon)
On the busy main road slicing Figueres is this handy information place. It opens longer hours in high season.
8Getting There & Away
Sarfa buses serve Cadaqués (€5.50, one to 1½ hours, four on weekdays) via Castelló d’Empúries.
There are half-hourly train connections to Girona (€4.10 to €5.45, 30 minutes) and Barcelona (€12 to €16, 1¾ to 2½ hours). Hourly trains chug towards Portbou (€3.40, 30 minutes) for connections across the French border.
WORTH A TRIP
MUSEU MEMORIAL DE L'EXILI

Museu Memorial de l'ExiliMUSEUM
(www.museuexili.cat; Carrer Major 43-47, La Jonquera; adult/child €4/free; h10am-6pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
Anyone familiar with Picasso’s Guernica already has a tiny insight into the horror of civilian suffering during Spain’s Civil War. This museum traces the experiences of Catalonian people exiled and persecuted during this era. This thought-provoking museum is aptly located in the town of La Jonquera, close to the Spain–France border where many were forced to flee. It explains the build-up to the Spanish Civil War through photographs, an informative audio guide, and haunting art installations.
Besalú
Pop 2400
The broad but elegant 12th-century Pont Fortificat (Fortified Bridge) over Río Fluvià in medieval Besalú, with its two tower gates and heavy portcullis, is an arresting sight, leading you into the coiled maze of cobbled narrow streets that make up the core of this delightfully well-preserved town. Following a succession of Roman, Visigothic and Muslim rulers, during the 10th and 11th centuries Besalú was the capital of an independent county that stretched as far west as Cerdanya before it came under Barcelona’s control in 1111. Today it's a favourite day-trip destination from Girona, with a steady stream of visitors roaming the ramparts and exploring Besalú's Jewish history.
1Sights
oPont FortificatBRIDGE
Besalú’s fortified stone bridge is so old, it strains memory. The first records of the bridge date to 1075, though periodic modifications have bolstered its defensive structure. It was bombed in 1939 during the Spanish Civil War and repaired soon after. Today this pale sandstone bridge, with its sturdy tower and portcullis, is a vantage point for the loveliest views of medieval Besalú.
MicromundiMUSEUM
(www.museuminiaturesbesalu.com; Plaça Prat de Sant Pere 15; adult/child €4.90/2.50; h10am-8pm daily Apr-Oct, 10am-3pm Tue-Fri, to 8pm Sat & Sun Nov-Mar; c)
Prepare to squint with increasing intensity as you enter this peculiar museum opposite Monestir de Sant Pere. Peer through a magnifying glass at jewellery, figurines and tiny dioramas from around the world, including ants wielding parasols, Lilliputian re-creations of the siege of Troy, and retina-spraining Mexican skulls. The third of the museum's three rooms has a row of microscopes above creations invisible to the naked eye, including Besalú's bridge on a pin's head and camels passing through the eye of a needle.
Jewish SquareRUINS
(Baixada de Mikwe; guided tours €2.20)
Besalú’s thriving Jewish community fled the town in 1436 after relentless Christian persecution. They left behind a miqvé (ritual bath) dating from the 12th century, a rare survivor of its kind in Spain, which was only rediscovered in 1964. It sits down by the river inside a vaulted stone chamber, around which remnants of the 13th-century synagogue were unearthed during excavations in 2005. Access to the miqvé is by guided tour, but you can see the square and ruin exterior independently.
4Sleeping & Eating
3 ArcsHOTEL€€
(%972 59 16 78; www.hotel3arcs.com; Carrer Ganganell 15; s/d/tr €73/84/99; aW)
As the name suggests, you'll know this place by the slender stone archways adjoining this fine old-town building. Its 12 simple rooms are compact and modern, and set within a refurbished historic building. There is a pleasant downstairs bakery and friendly management. Prices are up to 20% lower outside high season.
Els Jardins de la MartanaHOTEL€€
(%972 59 00 09; www.lamartana.com; Carrer del Pont Vell 2; s/d/tr €70/112/135; paW)
This charming, family-run hotel, set in a mansion dating from 1910, is on the out-of-town end of the grand old bridge. The 10 rooms have tiled floors, high ceilings and balconies, and many offer views across the bridge to the town. There's a beautiful terrace and gardens, a noble library with fireplace, and various family rooms positioned around a dedicated kids' play area. It could do with a spruce up, but is lovable and very friendly.
Restaurant La Cúria ReialCATALAN€€
(%972 59 02 63; www.curiareial.com; Plaça Libertat 8-9; mains €12; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-10.30pm Wed-Mon)
Whether dining beneath the arches in its snug stone interior or out on the terrace overlooking the bridge, an atmospheric experience is assured at Cúria Reial. The menu, spanning market fare and cuina volcànica from the fertile Garrotxa hills, delights with tasty lunch menus (€18.50), juicy grilled fish and lavish desserts, such as jasmine ice cream served in chilled melon soup.
Pont VellCATALAN€€
(%972 59 10 27; www.restaurantpontvell.com; Pont Vell 26; mains €15-24; h1-3.30pm Wed-Mon, 8.30pm-10.30pm Wed-Sat, closed late Dec-late Jan)
The views to the old bridge (after which the restaurant is named) are enough to tempt you to take a seat here, even without considering the wide-ranging menu full of locally sourced delights, such as home-made terrines, ox tail in red wine, and cannelloni of guineafowl and truffles.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 59 12 40; www.besalu.cat; Carrer del Pont 1; h10am-1.30pm daily, 4-7pm Mon-Sat)
Across the bridge from the centre.
8Getting There & Away
Teisa buses (www.teisa-bus.com) run to Barcelona (€15.40, 1¾ hours, three to four daily), Olot (€3.45, 30 minutes, eight to 13 daily), Figueres (€3.45 to €4, 30 minutes, two to three daily) and Girona (€4.10 to €4.70, one hour, four to 12 daily).
The N260 road from Figueres to Olot meets the C66 from Girona at Besalú.
THE PYRENEES
Catalonia's Pyrenees are more than an all-season adventure playground. Certainly, the Val d'Aran draws skiers and snowboarders in winter, with resorts ranging from red-carpet to family-friendly. Summer and autumn lure hikers to the jewel-like lakes and valleys of the Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici and the climbing terrain of the Serra del Cadí.
But there is also Catalan heritage to be discovered amid the breathtaking scenery. Centuries-old monasteries slumber in these mountains, meaning treks in the Pyrenees are as likely to bypass ruined Romanesque churches as offer a valley panorama. Tastebuds yearning for more than hiking fodder will find satisfaction in the rich gastronomy of Garrotxa's volcanic zone. Beyond the big-ticket sights and major resorts, Catalonia's Pyrenees conceal a raw beauty that awaits discovery.
OUT & ABOUT IN THE PYRENEES

The Catalan Pyrenees provide magnificent walking and trekking. You can undertake strolls of a few hours, or day walks that can be strung together into treks of several days. Nearly all can be done without camping gear, with nights spent in villages or refugis (no-frills mountain shelters).
Most of the refugis are run by two Barcelona mountain clubs, the Federació d’Entitats Excursionistes de Catalunya (FEEC; www.feec.org) and the Centre Excursionista de Catalunya (CEC; www.cec.cat), which also provide info on trails. A night in a refugi costs around €12.50 to €18. Moderately priced meals (around €15 to €20) are sometimes available in high season. It's worth calling ahead to assure your place (in summer, refugis can fill up, and in shoulder season, many are closed) and to ask if cooking facilities are available.
The coast-to-coast GR11 long-distance trail network traverses the entire Pyrenees from Cap de Creus on the Costa Brava to Hondarribia on the Bay of Biscay. The tougher HRP (Haute Randonnée Pyrénéenne), recommended only for the hardiest and most experienced trekkers, takes you higher up into the mountains, crossing the Spanish–French border several times.
The season for walking in the high Pyrenees is from late June to early October. Always be prepared for fast-changing conditions, no matter when you go.
Local advice from tourist offices, park rangers, mountain refugis and other walkers is invaluable. Dedicated hiking maps are essential.
There’s boundless scope for climbing – Pedraforca in the Serra del Cadí offers some of the most exciting ascents.
Olot
Pop 972 / Elev 443m
If you perceive a rumbling sensation during your travels in Olot, it might be more than your belly bemoaning that over-sized crema catalana. More than 100 small earthquakes set Catalonia trembling each year, though most are barely perceptible. The scenery in Garrotxa, a lush region of cone-shaped hills spreading from regional capital Olot, was chiselled by more extreme geological activity 70,000 years ago.
Olot is a good base for exploring the area. The town spreads over a large area, with broad, tree-lined boulevards, but the medieval centre is agreeably walkable.
1Sights
Four hills of volcanic origin stand sentry on the fringes of Olot. Walk up Volcà del Montsacopa, 500m north of the centre, or Volcà de la Garrinada, 1km northeast of the centre, both of which are volcanic craters.
A combined museum ticket grants access to both the Museu dels Volcans and Museu Comarcal de la Garrotxa (€4).
2Activities
Vol de ColomsBALLOONING
(%972 68 02 55; www.voldecoloms.cat; flights from €170)
These hot-air-balloon trips over Garrotxa's hills are a memorable way to experience the scale of the volcano-carved scenery. Flights last about 90 minutes and include cava, a snack and a flight certificate to prove your bravery.
4Sleeping
oCan BlancCASA RURAL€€
(%972 27 60 20; www.canblanc.es; Passatges de la Deu; s/d/tr incl breakfast €62/100/130; paWs)
This secluded place on the southern edge of Olot is surrounded by parkland. Colourful, modern-rustic rooms come in a range of shapes and sizes. The gardens and pool will put a smile on your face on hot summer days and a great breakfast is thrown in. Ask for directions to the next-door La Deu restaurant, as people are more likely to know it.
Hotel La PerlaHOTEL€€
(%972 26 23 26; www.laperlahotels.com; Carretera la Deu 9; s/d/apt from €40/70/83; paW)
This family-friendly hotel complex, 2km south of central Olot, has pleasant rooms and apartments, some with terraces, plus a soothing outdoor area with a babbling volcanic stone fountain. There are play areas and games rooms to keep kids busy and a friendly restaurant with changing set menus brimming with simple local produce. The location is quiet, but it's only a 400m walk to Parc Nou and the volcano museum.
5Eating
La DeuCUINA VOLCÀNICA€€
(%972 26 10 04; www.ladeu.es; Carretera la Deu; mains €10-23; h1-4pm & 8.30-10.30pm Mon-Sat, 1-4pm Sun; pW)
Down a tree-lined road with a volcanic stone fountain gushing merrily in its outdoor dining area, this family-run restaurant has been perfecting its filling local cuisine since the 19th century. There's huge variety, including the likes of slow-cooked lamb, pork with sweet chestnuts and cod lashed with local honey.
oLes ColsCUINA VOLCÀNICA€€€
(%972 26 92 09; www.lescols.com; Carretera de la Canya; degustation €85; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-10.30pm Wed-Sat, 1-3.30pm Tue & Sun)
Set in a converted 19th century masia, Les Cols is 2km northeast of central Olot. Inside, the decor has a 21st-century edge, with iron and glass walls, a chilled-out ambience and gourmet ambitions. Dishes with local products are prepared with a silken touch, from chicken and duck to wild boar.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
VOLCANIC CUISINE

In Olot and around, a dedicated group of chefs proudly carries on the cuina volcànica culinary tradition, which stems from the exceptionally fertile volcanic soil, responsible for a bounty of locally grown produce that forms the base of this hearty cuisine. Ingredients include black radishes, wild mushrooms, Santa Pau beans, ratafia (liquor with aromatic herbs, sometimes flavoured with walnut) and piumoc (dry pork sausage).
8Information
Casal dels VolcansTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 26 62 02; http://parcsnaturals.gencat.cat/ca/garrotxa; Parc Nou, Avinguda de Santa Coloma; h10am-2pm & 4-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
Information about the Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica de la Garrotxa.
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 26 01 41; www.turismeolot.cat; Carrer Doctor Fàbregas 6; h10am-1pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
This brand-new tourist information centre has a slick, modern interior (tread carefully over that glass floor) and multilingual staff armed with maps and informative pamphlets galore.
8Getting There & Away
Teisa (www.teisa-bus.com) runs buses to/from Barcelona (€13.60 to €18.50, two to 2¼ hours, three to seven daily) and Girona via Besalú (€3.45, 45 minutes, seven to 12 daily). The easiest approach by car from Barcelona is by the AP7 and C63.
Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica de la Garrotxa
The hills around Olot are volcanic in origin, making up the 120 sq km Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica de la Garrotxa. Volcanic eruptions began here about 350,000 years ago, but the last one was 11,500 years ago. As the African and Eurasian tectonic plates nudge ever closer (at a rate of 2cm per year), the occasional mild earthquake still sends a shiver across Garrotxa. But the volcanoes have long snoozed under a blanket of meadows and oak forests.
The park completely surrounds Olot but the most interesting area is between Olot and the village of Santa Pau, 10km southeast. In the park there are about 40 volcanic cones, up to 160m high and 1.5km wide. Together with the lush vegetation, a result of fertile soils and a damp climate, these create a landscape of verdant beauty. Between the woods are crop fields, a few hamlets and scattered old stone farmhouses and Romanesque churches.
1Sights
Monestir de Sant Joan les FontsMONASTERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.turismesantjoanlesfonts.com; Sant Joan les Fonts; hnoon-2pm summer, noon-2pm Sat & Sun Sep-May)F
This riverside monastery is tucked away at the northern end of Sant Joan les Fonts, 9km north of Olot. The church, with its distinctive bulge and stone belltower, dates to the 12th century. While opening hours to this imposing building are limited, its broad Romanesque form makes for a pleasant view if you want to pause between Olot and the dramatic cliffs of Castellfollit de la Roca.
2Activities
There are 28 hiking routes around the natural park, most of which are clearly signposted. A number of easy walking trails lead directly from the car parks near Olot and Santa Pau to the volcanic cones. Inquire at the park information office Casal dels Volcans in Olot, where you can collect helpful hiking maps and info on trails. The basalt lava flows near the town of Sant Joan les Fonts are an especially stunning place to walk.
4Sleeping
The biggest choice of accommodation is in Olot. Smaller towns Sant Joan les Fonts, Castellfollit de la Roca and Santa Pau each have a handful of guesthouses, plus there are camp sites within the natural-park area.
Camping Lava EcológicCAMPGROUND€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 68 03 58; www.campinglava.com; Carretera Olot-Santa Pau, Km 7; car & tent/adult/child €17/8/7; pis)
This campground within Garrotxa's parc natural has solid amenities, including laundry facilities, hot showers and internet, plus ample outdoor space, a pool (summer only) and easy access to activities including hiking trails and horse riding. For those who abhor the great outdoors, there are bungalows that sleep up to six people (from €72).
Pensión Mont RocPENSION€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 29 41 06; Carretera Olot-Girona, Castellfollit de la Roca; paW)
This relaxing guesthouse with snug rooms and somewhat old-fashioned decor has an unbeatable view of the town of Castellfollit de la Roca teetering on the edge of a cliff. The restaurant downstairs serves Catalan cuisine overlooking the spectacular scenery.
8Getting There & Away
Teisa (www.teisa-bus.com) runs buses from Garrotxa's main hub Olot to Barcelona (€13.60 to €18.50, two to 2¼ hours, three to seven daily) and Girona via Besalú (€3.45, 45 minutes, seven to 12 daily). The easiest approach by car from Barcelona is by the AP7 and C63 towards Olot.
8Getting Around
Garrotxa is best explored by rental car or bicycle. Public transport around the region is light, but Teisa runs buses from Olot to Castellfollit de la Roca via Sant Joan de les Fonts (€1.70, 15 minutes, two daily).
Ripoll
Pop 10,751 / Elev 691m
With an impressive monastery at Ripoll’s heart, and another close by in tiny Sant Joan de les Abadesses, this otherwise unremarkable town is a worthy stopover for admirers of Romanesque art.
Ripoll can claim, with some justice, to be the birthplace of Catalonia. In the 9th century it was the power base from which local strongman Guifré el Pilós (Wilfred the Hairy) succeeded in uniting several counties of the Frankish March along the southern side of the Pyrenees. Guifré went on to become the first in a line of hereditary counts of Barcelona. To encourage repopulation of the Pyrenean valleys, he founded the Monestir de Santa Maria, the most powerful monastery of medieval Catalonia – and was buried there after death.
Ripoll is well situated for rambling the dormant volcanoes of Garrotxa, 30km east, or the vertiginous hiking and skiing terrain around the Vall de Ribes, 13km north.
1Sights
oMonestir de Santa MariaMONASTERY
(www.monestirderipoll.cat; Plaça de l’Abat Oliba; adult/child €5.50/2.75; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun Apr-Sep, 10am-1.30pm & 3.30-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun Oct-Mar)
Consecrated in AD 888, the Monestir de Santa Maria was Catalonia’s spiritual and cultural heart from the mid-10th to mid-11th centuries. The five-naved basilica was adorned in about 1100 with a stone portal that ranks among the most splendid Romanesque art in Spain. The well restored basilica interior has admirable floor mosaics, a display about the Bibles of Ripoll (rare illustrated manuscripts created between 1008 and 1020), plus the tomb of Guifré el Pilós, who founded the monastery.
DON'T MISS
DRAGONS, GIANTS & BIG HEADS

Fire and fireworks play a big part in many Spanish festivals, but Catalonia adds a special twist with the correfoc (fire-running), in which devil and dragon figures run through the streets spitting fireworks at the crowds.
Correfocs are often part of the festa major, a town or village’s main annual festival, which usually takes place in July or August. Part of the festa major fun are the sardana (Catalonia’s national folk dance) and gegants, splendidly attired 5m-high giants that parade through the streets or dance in the squares. Giants tend to come in male-and-female pairs, such as a medieval king and queen. Almost every town and village has its own pair, or up to six pairs, of giants. They’re accompanied by grotesque ‘dwarfs’ (known as capsgrossos, or ‘big-heads’).
On La Nit de Sant Joan (23 June), big bonfires burn at crossroads and town squares in a combined midsummer and St John’s Eve celebration, and fireworks explode all night. The supreme fire festival is the Patum in Berga, 30km west of Ripoll. An evening of dancing and firework-spitting angels, devils, mulelike monsters, dwarfs, giants and men covered in grass culminates in a mass frenzy of fire and smoke. Patum happens on Corpus Christi (the Thursday 60 days after Easter Sunday).
4Sleeping
Hostal RipollèsHOSTAL€
(%972 70 02 15; www.hostaldelripolles.com; Plaça Nova 11; s/d/tr from €33/47/66; W)
Within the town’s medieval heart, this family establishment has decent en-suite rooms above a restaurant that whips up pizza, pasta and regional dishes. The decor may be grandmotherly, but the atmosphere is friendly and the location is excellent, mere steps from Ripoll's monastery and main square.
La TrobadaHOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 70 23 53; www.latrobadahotel.com; Passeig del Compositor Honorat Vilamanyà 4; s/d/tr €40/65/85; pW)
Clean, simple and with polite, eager-to-please staff, La Trobada has Ripoll's most comfortable accommodation. Rooms are plain but well maintained, and many offer fine views towards the Monestir de Santa Maria. The restaurant downstairs serves simple Catalan fare for lunch and dinner. La Trobada is less than five minutes' walk from central Ripoll.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 70 23 51; www.ripoll.cat/turisme; Plaça del Abat Oliba; h10am-1.30pm & 3.30-6pm Mon-Sat, to 7pm summer, 10am-2pm Sun)
Next door to the Monestir de Santa Maria. Opening hours vary seasonally.
8Getting There & Away
Daily rodalies trains (line R3) run from Ripoll to Barcelona (€8.40, two hours, 12 to 16 daily) via Vic (€4.10, 40 minutes). Heading north from Ripoll, trains reach Ribes de Freser (€2.50, 20 minutes, up to seven daily) and Puigcerdà (€4.90, one hour, seven daily).
WORTH A TRIP
SANT JOAN DE LES ABADESSE

oMonestir de Sant Joan de les AbadessesMONASTERY
(www.monestirsantjoanabadesses.cat; Plaça de l’Abadia; admission €3; h10am-2pm & 4-6pm Mon-Sat Mar-Oct, 10am-2pm Mon-Sat Nov-Feb)
Who gallops through the hills around Sant Joan de les Abadesses on stormy nights, engulfed in flames and accompanied by ravenous black dogs? If you believe the stories, it's the legendary cursed Count Arnau, whose association with the Monestir de Sant Joan de les Abadesses has bequeathed it a heritage of brooding fairytales alongside its centuries of spiritual activity. The monastery is worth a visit for both its architectural treasures and the count's legend, richly illustrated in a permanent display.
8Getting There & Away
Sant Joan de les Abadesses is 10km east of Ripoll on the N260 to Olot; there is a small free car park for tourists just north of the main road, signposted as you enter the town centre.
Teisa (www.teisa-bus.com) operates buses more than hourly weekdays and two-hourly at weekends from Ripoll (€1.95, 15 minutes).
Vall de Núria & Ribes de Freser
A trio of little towns populate the Vall de Ribes and Vall de Núria, southeast of Cerdanya and north of Ripoll. Here spectacular ragged hills, pine forests and plummeting dales are squeezed between the Serra Cavallera and Serra de Montgrony ranges, rippling north to the Capçaleres del Ter i del Freser mountains.
Sheltered within the Vall de Ribes is the small but well-equipped town of Ribes de Freser, 13km north of Ripoll. A further 6km north lies Queralbs, a charming stone village perched at an altitude of 1180m. Beyond here, and accessible only by cremallera (rack railway), is Núria (1960m to 2252m). This lofty valley holds the sanctuary of the Mare de Déu de Núria icon, though in winter it draws as many winter-sports devotees as pilgrims. Reaching Núria by cremallera is a worthy day trip for its views alone: the train rattles past lichen-streaked rubble, waterfalls, patches of forest, and gaping valleys.
1Sights
oSantuari de la Mare de DéuCHURCH
(www.valldenuria.cat; Núria; h8am-6.30pm)F
The sanctuary (1911) sits incongruously in the centre of a building (now a hotel) that emits an unfortunate boarding-school vibe. A pastel-painted passageway trimmed with gold leads visitors from the main church to the upper level, housing the Mare de Déu de Núria behind a glass screen above the altar. Mary, with a regal expression, sits in star-spangled robes, clasping a grown-up Jesus. The icon is in 12th-century Romanesque style, despite believers insisting that Sant Gil sculpted it back in AD 700.
2Activities
Núria Ski ResortSKIING
(%972 73 20 20; www.valldenuria.cat/hivern; day lift pass with train adult/child €27/20.20; hDec-Mar; c)
In winter, Núria transforms into a small-scale ski resort with 11 short runs. Much of the terrain is geared towards beginners, though there are two red (intermediate) and black (advanced) slopes to keep more experienced skiers and boarders busy for an afternoon. There’s also a separate kids' activity area with tobogganing in winter and pony rides in summer.
4Sleeping
Alberg Pic de l’ÀligaHOSTEL€
(%972 73 20 48; www.xanascat.cat; Núria; dm under/over 30yr incl breakfast €23/28; hJan-Sep)
Fancy a cheap sleep 2120m above sea level? This youth hostel in a spacious lodge is perched at the top of the telecabina (cable car) leading up from the Hotel Vall de Núria. Dorm rooms sleep from three to 18 people and it has a bar, board games and a common room for mingling with other travellers.
oHotel Els CaçadorsHOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 72 70 77; www.cacadors.com; Carrer de Balandrau 24, Ribes de Freser; s/d from €61/82; hDec-Oct; paW)
Family-run since 1920, this local institution has ample rooms in three grades: 'bronze' has warm beige tones and wood fittings, 'silver' ramps up the comfort with hydromassage tubs (some with skylights for star-gazing), while 'gold' rooms and suites are the most luxurious, aimed at romantic getaways. There is a top-floor lounge plus a deck where the Jacuzzi offers mountain views.
Hostal les RoquetesHOSTAL€€
(%972 72 73 69; www.hostalroquetes.com; Carretera de Ribes 5, Queralbs; d €66-78; pW)
This comforting and scenically situated guesthouse is a few paces above the train station in Queralbs, a great location for walking or day trips up to Núria via the funicular. Rooms are sizeable and clean, some with a little terrace and inspiring mountain views. Half-board options are available from the restaurant downstairs.
8Information
Núria Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 73 20 20; www.valldenuria.com; Núria; h8.30am-4.45pm)
This tourist info place within Núria's sanctuary is open extended hours during high season.
Ribes de Freser Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%972 72 77 28; www.vallderibes.cat; Carretera de Bruguera 2, Ribes de Freser; h10am-2pm & 4-6pm Tue-Thu, 10am-2pm & 4-7pm Fri & Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
At the southern entrance to town, this tourist information office offers advice on cultural sights, transport and trail maps. Opening hours vary seasonally.
8Getting There & Away
There are two train stations in Ribes de Freser. Ribes-Enllaç, just south of town, has connecting trains to Barcelona (€9.10, two to 2½ hours, seven daily) and Ripoll (€2.50, 20 minutes, seven daily).
The more centrally located Ribes-Vila is a cremallera (%973 73 20 20; www.valldenuria.cat; Ribes-Núria 1-way/return adult €14.25/22.80, child €8.55/13.70) stop between lower station Ribes-Enllaç and Queralbs, along the line to Núria (which isn't reachable by car). These trains run from Ribes de Freser to Núria via Queralbs six to 12 times a day (35 minutes, 20 from Queralbs), depending on the season. There are car parks at Ribes-Enllaç and Queralbs if you are making a day trip to Núria via cremallera.
Cerdanya
Cerdanya, along with French Cerdagne across the border, occupies a low-lying green basin between the higher reaches of the Pyrenees to the east and west. Although Cerdanya and Cerdagne, once a single Catalan county, were divided by the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659, Catalan is spoken on both sides of the border and Spain flows seamlessly into France.
Puigcerdà
Pop 8761 / Elev 1202m
Barely 2km from France, Puigcerdà (puh-cher-da) dates back to the 12th century – not that you’d know it, since it lost most of its historical buildings during the civil war. The town’s not much more than a waystation, but it’s a jolly one, teeming with hikers in summer and used as a base by skiers during the winter season. A dozen Spanish, Andorran and French ski resorts lie within 45km.
1Sights
Estany de PuigcerdàLAKE
( GOOGLE MAP )
The estany (lake) in the north of town was created during the 13th century for irrigation purposes. Today it's a superb spot for a stroll: rowing boats and birdlife bob across its surface in summer, while winter amplifies the majesty of the snow-streaked mountains visible from the shore. The lake is surrounded by turn-of-the-20th-century summer houses, built by wealthy Barcelona families.
Església de Santa MariaTOWER
( GOOGLE MAP ; Plaça de Santa Maria)
Only the tower remains of the 17th-century Església de Santa Maria. Nonetheless this stocky Romanesque structure dominates lively Plaça Santa Maria, and a tourist information office is within.
4Sleeping
Sant MarcCASA RURAL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 88 00 07; www.santmarc.es; Camí de Sant Marc 34; d/f from €81/145; pWs)
Extensive tree-lined grounds and down-filled duvets on plush beds greet you at this casa rural 2km south of Puigcerdà's town centre. The wood-floored rooms are spacious and decorated in soothing creams and the stone-walled restaurant specialises in dishes that make maximum use of local meats and cheeses. It has ample outdoor space to snooze in, horses to ride, and a bottle of cava in your room comes as standard. Book at least a couple of days ahead.
oVilla PaulitaHISTORIC HOTEL€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 88 46 22; www.villapaulitahotel.com; Avinguda Pons i Gasch 15; d €110-200; piWs)
The fairytale towers of this bright-red 19th-century manor house signal the town’s most charming and luxurious accommodation. It offers a good spa complex (included), friendly and professional service, and an excellent restaurant with vistas over the lake. Check the website for seasonal closures.
5Eating
Pop a button for local speciality trinxat, a fried flan of potato and cabbage, garnished with strips of crisp pork belly. Cargols (snails) are also popular in this region. For its size, Puigcerdà has a very good selection of fine dining and casual tapas options, many of which cluster around Plaça Santa Maria and along Carrer Alfons I.
La CaixetaTAPAS€
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.facebook.com/caixetabistro; Carrer Querol 22; dishes €4-12; h11am-2am Wed-Mon)
You're never quite sure which side of the border you're on here. A cheerful cafe-bar with artful hipster decor, this place does cupcakes and cocktails, as well as generous glasses of French wine, and deli-style tapas that run from foie gras and camembert to Catalan charcuterie.
oTapaNyamCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 88 23 60; http://tapanyam.es; Plaça de l'Alguer 2; mains €8-12; h1-11pm Wed-Sun, to 5pm Mon)
Pair crisp sauvignon blanc with equally invigorating views at TapaNyam. Outdoor diners at this friendly restaurant can enjoy a panorama of Puigcerdà's slate rooftops and green meadows that stretch right to the Pyrenees. Feast on local favourites like trinxat (potato and cabbage with a pork garnish), grilled snails or rabbit with garlic mayonnaise, or graze on tapas of mussels, octopus and mountain cheeses; whatever your hunger level, you're sure to raise a glass to the tremendous view.
El CaliuCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 14 08 25; Carrer Alfons 1; mains €8-14; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm Thu-Mon, 1-3pm Tue)
Dishes at this well-respected restaurant have an emphasis on local ingredients; try the Catalan-style pizza with goat's cheese, confit duck or pastís de bolets, a rich pâté of seasonal mushrooms.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %972 88 05 42; Plaça Santa Maria; h9.30am-1.30pm & 4.30-7.30pm Mon-Fri, 10am-1.30pm & 5-7.30pm Sat, 10am-1.30pm Sun)
Friendly tourist office in central Puigcerdà, located within a historic tower.
8Getting There & Away
The bus and train stations are at the foot of the hill, just southwest of central Puigcerdà.
ALSA (www.alsa.es) buses run to/from Barcelona (€20.40, three hours, one or two daily) and La Seu d’Urgell (€6.90, one hour, four to six daily).
From Barcelona, the C16 approaches Puigcerdà through the Túnel del Cadí. Puigcerdà is also reachable via the picturesque N260 from Ribes de Freser. The main crossing into France is at Bourg-Madame, immediately east of Puigcerdà.
Rodalies trains run from Barcelona to Puigcerdà (€12, 2½ to three hours, six daily) via Vic, Ripoll and Ribes de Freser. Four to five a day continue across the border to Latour-de-Carol, where you can connect to the French network.
Llívia
Pop 1536 / Elev 1224m
Look twice at your map of the Spain–France border. Just 6km northeast of Puigcerdà, amid verdant meadows and little French villages, is Llívia, a tiny bastion of Catalonia beyond the main border between France and Spain. Under the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees, Spain ceded 33 villages to France, but Llívia was a ‘town’ and so, together with the 13 sq km of its municipality, remained a Spanish possession. Much more than just a cartographical oddity, this small town has a charming medieval centre and more excellent restaurants than you might expect for its size. The majority of visitors arrive to hike the hills during summer, and to access ski resorts on the Spanish and French sides of the Pyrenees.
1Sights
Llívia’s few sights lie in its tiny medieval nucleus near the top of town, including the entertaining Museu Municipal and the 15th-century Gothic Església de Mara de Déu dels Àngels, which has three defensive towers around it. The ruined castle above the town is little more than wall remnants; find hiking trail maps for the surrounding area in the tourist office.
Museu MunicipalMUSEUM
(Carrer dels Forns 4; adult/child €3/1; h10am-6pm Tue-Fri, 10am-8pm Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
Inside what's alleged to be the world's oldest pharmacy building (dating to 1415) unfurls the region's history from Neolithic to modern day. The highlight is a curiosity chest of mortars and pestles, ancient maps and bottles of unguents linked to the medieval pharmacy.
4Sleeping & Eating
Hotel EsquirolHOTEL€€
(%972 89 63 03; www.hotelesquirol.net; Avinguda Catalunya; s/d €60/70)
This excellent hotel has the feel of a mountain lodge, with stone walls, wooden eaves and the odd pair of historic skis adorning the walls, but it's only 300m from the town centre. Hotel Esquirol's 19 rooms have a homey feel, many with wooden ceilings and floral quilts, while the service is efficient but friendly. Book ahead on the website for discounts.
oCan VenturaCATALAN€€
(%972 89 61 78; www.canventura.com; Plaça Major 1; mains €14-20; h1.30-3.30pm & 8-10.30pm Wed-Sun)
Beautifully prepared Catalan food with a whisper of French flair. Aptly for a restaurant within a 1791 building, traditional Catalan flavours have pride of place, like grilled octopus, slow-cooked lamb and smoky trinxat, but you'll also taste hints of Asian fusion. Desserts like a silky mousse of fromage blanc (sweet white cheese) and bilberries, or steamy chocolate fondant, are an irresistible finish.
8Getting There & Away
Four to eight ALSA (www.alsa.es) buses run from Puigcerdà to Llívia daily (€1.70, 20 minutes).
La Molina & Masella
These ski resorts lie either side of Tosa d’Alp (2537m), 15km south of Puigcerdà, and are linked by the Alp 2500 lift. La Molina and Masella Ski Resorts (www.lamolina.cat; day lift pass adult/child €41/31; h9am-4pm late Nov-late Apr) have a combined total of 135km of runs of all grades at altitudes of 1600m to over 2500m. Rental equipment and ski schools are available at both resorts; La Molina is better for beginners. Lift passes cover the whole area. In the summer, La Molina caters to adrenalin junkies with its mountain-bike park, quad-biking and more.
4Sleeping
Alberg Mare de Déu de les NeusHOSTEL€
(%972 89 20 12; www.xanascat.cat; La Molina; dm under/over 30 incl breakfast €18/22; piW)
At the bottom part of La Molina, near the train station and 4km from the slopes, this handy youth hostel is far and away the cheapest place to stay. Rooms range from twin to eight-bed dorms; there's a small supplement for en-suite dorms. The atmosphere is efficient though convivial. There are ski lockers and you can buy hot meals. Call ahead: the timing of seasonal closures can vary.
Hotel AdseràHOTEL€€
(%972 89 20 01; www.hoteladsera.com; Carrer Pere Adserà, La Molina; s/d/tr/q incl breakfast €78/130/162/195; hNov-Easter & Jul-Aug; piWs)
This homey hotel in a stone building offers a personal touch and historic charm unlike many of the region's resort choices. Just 2.5km below the slopes, this hotel is an excellent choice for families with its rotating daily activities for kids, plus a games room, garden and pool. Rooms are compact and simple, and the staff are bursting not only with skiing advice (ask about piste pass discounts) but suggestions for summer activities too.
8Getting There & Away
In the ski season there’s a bus service from Puigcerdà to the ski area plus infrequent daily services from Llívia via Puigcerdà to La Molina's telecabina (cable car; 7.40am), and regular buses from La Molina town (€2) up to the slopes. The easiest driving route from Barcelona is by the C58 toll road and the C16 through the Túnel del Cadí.
La Seu d'Urgell
Pop 12,366 / Elev 691m
The lively valley town of La Seu d’Urgell (la se-u dur-zhey) is Spain’s gateway to Andorra, 10km to the north. La Seu has an attractive medieval centre, watched over by an admirable Romanesque cathedral. When the Franks evicted the Muslims from this part of the Pyrenees in the early 9th century, they made La Seu a bishopric and capital of the counts of Urgell; it remains an important market and cathedral town.
1Sights
oCatedral de Santa Maria & Museu DiocesàCATHEDRAL, MUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; adult/child €3/free; h10am-1.30pm year-round, plus 4-6pm mid-Mar–May & mid-Sep–Oct, 4-7.30pm Jun–mid-Sep)
Dominating La Seu d'Urgell's old town on the southern side of Plaça dels Oms is the 12th-century Catedral de Santa Maria. This pale sandstone cathedral complex is one of Catalonia’s outstanding Romanesque buildings. Its neat cloister is rich in characterful carved capitals depicting mythical beasts and grimacing gargoyles. The superb attached museum (which follows the cathedral's opening hours) has a wealth of Romanesque frescoes from various churches, as well as a copy of the 10th-century Beatus de Liébana, king among medieval illustrated manuscripts.
4Sleeping
Casa Rural La Vall del CadíCASA RURAL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 35 03 90; www.valldelcadi.com; Carretera de Tuixén; s/d €49/55; paW)
Barely a 1km walk south of the centre and across the Segre River, you are in another, protected, bucolic world in this stone country house on a working family-run farm (and it smells as such!). Cosy rooms, with terracotta floors, iron bedsteads and, in some cases, timber ceiling beams, have a nice winter detail – underfloor heating. Some rooms share bathrooms.
Hotel AndriaHISTORIC HOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 35 03 00; www.hotelandria.com; Passeig Joan Brudieu 24; s/d incl breakfast from €66/88; paW)
This welcoming hotel in a building dating to 1876 has a more refreshing feel than its competition, with a flower garden, terrace and romantic restaurant. Rooms vary in size but are all comfortable, with a charming decor of wooden beams and antique fittings. With advance warning, the hotel's excellent restaurant can cater admirably for dietary requirements from vegetarian to gluten-free.
Parador de La Seu d'UrgellHISTORIC HOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 35 20 00; www.parador.es; Carrer de Sant Domènec 6; d from €80)
While not as palatial as some of Spain's paradores (state-run hotels in heritage buildings), this pleasing hotel has plain, modern rooms surrounding an elegant cloister, whose stone archways are illuminated pink and green at night. Right by La Seu d'Urgell's cathedral, there's no better location to soak up the atmosphere of the medieval town centre.
5Eating
Restaurant IgnasiCREPERIE, FRENCH€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; restaurant.ignasi@hotmail.com; Carrer de Capdevila 17; mains €10-14; h1-4pm & 8.30-10.30pm Tue-Sun)
This lively restaurant within brightly coloured walls has galettes (buckwheat pancakes) as its speciality, along with French mountain favourites like tartiflette (a bake of potatoes, onions, bacon and rich Reblochon cheese) and risotto of meaty boletus mushrooms. Service can be slow in this popular spot, but it's always with a smile.
Les Tres PortesCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; Avinguda Joan Garriga i Massó 7; mains €8-19; h1.15-3.30pm & 8.30-10.30pm Thu-Sun)
Fill your belly with seasonal flavours, small tasting plates of Andalucian squid and patatas bravas (potatoes in a spicy tomato sauce), or a hearty range of Catalan favourites like cargols (snails) and grilled rabbit. The restaurant interior is warm and brightly decorated, while the tranquil garden is perfect for summer dining.
6Drinking & Nightlife
GlopsCOCKTAIL BAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.glops.com.es; Carrer Canonges 64; h5.30pm-12.30am Tue-Thu, 5.30pm-2.45am Fri & Sat, 5-11.30pm Sun)
This delightful cocktail bar is an enjoyably edgy contrast to the medieval centre of La Seu d'Urgell. Neon lights brighten the stone walls, decorated with miscellany from antique cameras and hand-drawn caricatures of the staff to African masks and fairy lights. But the wonderful mixed drinks (€5 to €8) will seize your attention, from inventive mojitos to gin cocktails piled high with forest fruits.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 35 15 11; www.turismeseu.com; Carrer Major 8; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 10am-1pm Sun)
Helpful office across the street from the cathedral has a leaflet on historical walks and a display on city history. Extended hours in high season.
8Getting There & Away
The bus station is on the northern edge of the old town. ALSA (www.alsa.es) runs buses to Barcelona (€28.25, three to 3½ hours, five daily), Puigcerdá (€6.90, one hour, four to six daily) and Lleida (€19.25, 2¼ hours, two to three daily).
WORTH A TRIP
ANDORRA

If you're on the lookout for great hiking or skiing, are keen to stock up on duty-free booze, smokes or electronics, or just want to say you've been in a different country, then the curious nation of Andorra, just 10km north of Seu d'Urgell, is for you. At only 468 sq km, it's one of Europe's smallest countries and, though it has a democratic parliament, the nominal heads of state are two co-princes: the bishop of Urgell in Spain, and the President of France. Catalan is the official tongue, though Spanish, French and, due to a large immigrant workforce, Portuguese are widely spoken. Regular buses run from Seu d'Urgell to the busy capital, Andorra la Vella. If driving, make sure to fuel up in Andorra, as it's significantly cheaper. There's rarely any passport control, though you may well be stopped by customs on the way back into Spain, so don't go over the duty-free limit.
Pallars Sobirà
The Riu Noguera Pallaresa tumbles south from the heights of the Val d’Aran, the pristine scenery of Pallars Sobirà extending from both sides. West of the river lies the Parc Nacional Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici; to its east, the vast Parc Natural de l’Alt Pirineu, spangled with lonely Romanesque churches among which weave hiking trails.
The river itself draws rafters and other adventure-sports enthusiasts to the small towns along its banks, principally (from north to south) Llavorsí, Rialp and Sort. Each of these towns is well-equipped with accommodation, cafes and restaurants, though outside the March to October season, they are very quiet.
2Activities
The Riu Noguera Pallaresa’s grade IV drops attract a constant stream of white-water fans between mid-March and mid-October. It’s usually at its best in May and June.
The best stretch is the 12km from Llavorsí to Rialp, on which the standard raft outing costs around €41 per person for two hours. Longer rides to Sort and beyond will cost more, and Sort is the jumping-off point for the river’s tougher grade IV rapids.
In Llavorsí, there are several rafting operators, most of whom offer a full range of summer activities including kayaking, canyoning, horse-riding, rock-climbing and canoeing as well as some winter programs. Operators include Roc Roi (%973 62 20 35; www.rocroi.com; Plaça Biuse 8, Llavorsí; 1hr rafting from €38; hmid-Mar–mid-Oct), Rafting Llavorsí (%973 62 21 58; http://raftingllavorsi.cat; Camí de Riberies, Llavorsí; half-day rafting €60) and, for more experienced rafters, Yeti Emotions (%973 62 22 01; www.yetiemotions.com; Carrer de Borda Era d’Alfons, Llavorsí). For rafting, bring your own swimming costume and towel and a change of clothes; other equipment provided.
SkipallarsSKIING
(%973 62 11 99; www.skipallars.cat; day pass from €25.60)
The ski areas of Port Ainé and Espot, both in the Pallars Sobirà region of the Pyrenees, have 70km of piste to ski or snowboard. A single ski pass allows access to both, plus the Tavascan area in the Parc Natural de l'Alt Pirineu.
4Sleeping
Hotel VictorHOTEL€
(%973 62 03 79; www.hotel-victor.es; Avenida Flora Cadena 35, Rialp; d/tr incl breakfast €64/92; pW)
Located in central Rialp on the main road running between Llavorsí and Sort, family-run Hotel Victor is as good a base for summer rafters as for winter ski trips. Rooms are clean, cosy and jazzily furbished. Staff can help arrange ski passes, and ski storage is available.
Hostal NogueraHOSTAL€
(%973 62 20 12; www.hostalnoguera.info; Carretera Vall d’Aran, Llavorsí; s/d €34/60; pW)
This stone building, on the southern edge of the village, has pleasant rooms overlooking the river, whose cascading noise will lull you to sleep. The downstairs restaurant has unremarkable but filling local specialities like fried eggs swimming in ratatouille, spicy Cuban-style rice and grilled meats.
Hotel PessetsHOTEL€€
(%973 62 00 00; www.hotelpessets.com; Avinguda de la Diputación 3, Sort; d/ste incl breakfast from €99/130; paWs)
At this wellness-focused hotel, lodgings range from simple neutral-toned double rooms to chic suites with naturalist prints and wood-panelled ceilings. The highlights are the spa area complete with both indoor and outdoor pools (though the latter is seasonal) and a private outdoor chill-out area with mountain views.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%973 62 10 02; www.pallarssobira.info; Camí de la Cabanera, Sort; h10am-2pm Sun-Thu, 10am-2pm & 4-7pm Fri & Sat)
The main tourist office for the area is in Sort. This information centre is packed to the rafters with all the maps and trail info you'll ever need, supplied by helpful, multilingual staff.
8Getting There & Away
ALSA (www.alsa.es) runs buses to Llavorsí via Sort and Rialp from Barcelona (€36, one daily, five hours) and Lleida (€11.60, three to four daily, three hours). On-demand transport runs between La Seu d'Urgell and Sort (€4, twice daily, one hour). Call Viatges Matí (%689 495777) to book this.
WORTH A TRIP
PYRENEAN BACK ROADS

As beautiful and dramatic as Vall de la Noguera Pallaresa and Val d’Aran are, they can certainly feel rather overrun in summertime by rafters and hikers. If you’re looking for solitude and adventure off the beaten track, take the B-roads up into the hills northeast of Llavorsí and Esterri d’Àneu, or else north of Vielha, leading to some remote and, in parts, tough mountain-walking country along and across the Andorran and French borders. Highlights include glacial lakes and the ascent of the Pica d’Estats (3143m), the highest peak in Catalonia.
Parc Nacional d'Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici & Around
Catalonia’s only national park extends 20km east to west, and only 9km from north to south. But the rugged terrain within this small area sparkles with more than 400 lakes and countless streams and waterfalls, combined with a backdrop of pine and fir forests, and open bush and grassland, bedecked with wildflowers in spring and fringed with scarlet leaves in autumn.
Created by glacial action over two million years, the park is essentially two east–west valleys at 1600m to 2000m altitudes lined by jagged 2600m to 2900m peaks of granite and slate.
The national park lies at the core of a wider wilderness area. The outer limit is known as the zona periférica and includes some magnificent high country to the north and south.
The main approaches are via the village of Espot, 4km east of the park and 8km away from Estany de Sant Maurici lake, and Vall de Boí, part of its western sector.

Boí
Pop 973
The valley location of petite Boí draws trekkers and winter-sports lovers, while its belltower is one of the jewels of the region's Romanesque architecture.
DON'T MISS
CENTRE DEL ROMÀNIC DE LA VALL DE BOÍ

Centre del Romànic de la Vall de BoíMUSEUM
(%973 69 67 15; www.centreromanic.com; Carrer del Batalló 5, Erill la Vall; admission €2; h9am-2pm & 5-7pm Easter–mid-Oct)
The Vall de Boí, southwest of Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici, is dotted with some of Catalonia’s loveliest Romanesque churches – unadorned stone structures sitting in the crisp alpine air. Together these 11th- to 14th-century constructions were declared a Unesco World Heritage site in 2000. Kick-start your architectural odyssey with a visit to this interpretation centre. There is a small art collection, you can organise guided church tours, and it's a handy place to buy combined tickets (three churches for €7).
1Sights
Sant Joan de BoíCHURCH
(Boí; admission €2; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm Dec-Oct, to 8pm Jul & Aug)
This 11th-century church gives an air of romance to the village of Boí with its angular stone belltower, which was restored after a major fire in the 13th century. The wall paintings that brighten the interior are copies of the Romanesque originals, which are today preserved in Barcelona.
4Sleeping
Hostal PeyHOSTAL€€
(%973 69 60 36; www.hotelpey.com; Plaça Treio 4; d/tr/q incl breakfast from €82/96/117; p)
This mellow guesthouse in the centre of Boí has comfy, home-style rooms and a decent restaurant, plus ski storage and staff brimming with local advice. Book ahead; it's popular.
8Information
National Park Information OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%973 69 61 89; Carrer de les Graieres 2, Boí; h9am-2pm & 3.30-5.45pm Mon-Sat, 9am-2pm Sun)
Find trekking and winter-sports information at this tourism hub.
8Getting There & Away
Buses between Barcelona/Lleida and Vielha stop at El Pont de Suert year-round. From here a daily bus runs to Boí (€1 to €1.75, 25 minutes), leaving in the afternoon on weekdays and in the morning on weekends. In summer, there's a daily park bus connecting Espot with Boí via Vielha.
There are also nine-person taxis (%973 69 63 14; www.taxisvalldeboi.com; Plaça del Treio, Boí; 1-way Boí to Estany de Sant Maurici adult/child €5.25/3.25; h8am-7pm summer, 9am-6pm rest of yr) between the village of Boí and the Parc Nacional d'Aigüestortes.
Taüll
Pop 260
Three kilometres uphill from Boí, Taüll is by far the most picturesque place to stay on the west side of the Parc Nacional d'Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici.
1Sights
Sant Climent de TaüllCHURCH
(Taüll; admission €5; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm, to 8pm Jul & Aug, closed Mon Nov)
At the entrance to Taüll, this church is a gem not only for its elegant, simple lines and its slender six-storey belltower, but also for the art that once graced its interior. The central apse contains a copy of a famous 1123 mural that now resides in Barcelona’s Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya. At the church’s centre is a Pantocrator (Christ figure), whose rich Mozarabic-influenced colours, and expressive but superhuman features, have become a virtual emblem of Catalan Romanesque art. An audiovisual presentation gives background.
Santa Maria de TaüllCHURCH
(Taüll; h10am-7pm)F
Up in the old village centre of Taüll and crowned with a five-storey tower, the original artwork from this 11th-century church has been whisked away to Barcelona (like many of the churches in the region).
2Activities
Boí-Taüll Ski ResortSKIING
(www.boitaullresort.com; day-pass adult/child €39/29; hDec-early Apr)
High up at altitudes from 2020m to 2751m, this medium-sized ski resort has 45km of pistes, including a few slopes suitable for beginners and plenty more to please intermediate and advanced skiers and snowboarders. There is also a freestyle area and snowpark for practising those jumps.
4Sleeping & Eating
oAlberg TaüllHOSTEL€
(%973 69 62 52; www.alberguetaull.com; Avenida Feixanes 5, Taüll; dm €23, d €38-48, ste €95; pW)
This is everything a hostel should be: the stylish rooms feature large beds with orthopaedic mattresses, there’s underfloor heating for those crisp mornings, and the common area has a large map of the park to help you plan your hikes. Families are welcome and there's good walking advice. Sheets and a towel cost an extra €4.50. Cheaper midweek; prices include breakfast.
Santa MariaBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€
(%973 69 61 70; www.taull.com; Plaça Cap del Riu 3, Taüll; s/d incl breakfast €75/94; pW)
Through a shady entrance a grand stone archway leads into the quiet courtyard of this rambling country haven with rose-draped balcony, run by congenial hosts. The rooms are tastefully furnished and the building, all stonework with a timber-and-slate roof, oozes timeless character. There's wi-fi in common areas. The hotel closes throughout November.
SedonaINTERNATIONAL€
(%973 69 62 54; Les Feixes 2, Taüll; main €10; hnoon-4pm & 7-11.30pm Tue-Sun; Wv)
Catalan fish dishes, Tex-Mex and mixed tapas pile the plates at this food and après-ski hangout.
8Getting There & Away
Buses reach Vielha from Barcelona (€34.87, five to six hours, seven daily) and Lleida (€13.87, 2½ to three hours, four or five daily) stop at El Pont de Suert year-round. From here, irregular local buses reach Taüll. Driving is a much better option.
Espot
Pop 357
Scenic Espot is an excellent gateway to exploring the Parc Nacional d'Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici, which begins 4km west of this little town. Stone buildings add charm to Espot, which is well-equipped with places to eat and stay, while mountain views from the town centre will make you eager to lace up your hiking boots.
4Sleeping & Eating
oRoca BlancaHOTEL€€
(%973 62 41 56; www.hotelrocablanca.com; Carrer Església; d/ste incl breakfast €90/125; hmid-Nov–end Oct; pW)
This cheerful hotel is beautifully well-maintained, from its 16 spacious rooms with modern bathrooms to the polished lounge with fireplace – also home to a dopey St Bernard named Homer Simpson. Contemporary art adorns the walls, and service is attentive and personal. It also has a gym, sauna, and relaxing garden space for you to rest your quads after a day spent hiking or skiing.
Restaurant JuquimCATALAN€€
(%973 62 40 09; Plaća San Martí 1; mains €11-20; h12.45-4pm & 7.30-10.30pm, closed Tue mid-Oct–May)
This popular spot on the main square has a varied menu concentrating largely on filling country food, with generous winter warmers like pig's trotters slathered in garlic and olive oil, or civet de senglar (wild boar stew). The adjacent bar (open 8am to 11pm Thursday to Tuesday) does simpler fare and sandwiches.
8Information
National Park Information OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%973 62 40 36; www.gencat.cat/parcs/aiguestortes; Carrer de Sant Maurici 5, Espot; h9am-2pm & 3.30-5.45pm Mon-Sat, 9am-2pm Sun)
Find hiking tips, maps, transport advice and more in this helpful tourist office in Espot.
8Getting There & Away
ALSA (www.alsa.es) buses from Barcelona (€38.50, five hours, one daily) and Lleida (€13.10, three hours, three daily) to Esterri d’Áneu stop at the Espot turn-off on the C13. From there it’s a 7km uphill walk to Espot.
You can visit the Parc Nacional d'Aigüestortes with a little help from a fleet of 25 4WDs (%973 62 41 05; www.taxisespot.com; 1-way Espot to Estany de Sant Maurici adult/child €5.25/3.25; h8am-7pm summer, 9am-6pm rest of year) with fixed-rate tours to the park, lake and beyond.
WORTH A TRIP
SERRA DEL CADÍ

The spectacular Serra del Cadí offers a string of picturesque villages and mountains that offer excellent walking for those suitably equipped and experienced. The range’s most spectacular peak is Pedraforca ('Stone Pitchfork', 2497m), which offers the most challenging rock climbing in Catalonia, while the main Cadí range, part of Parc Natural Cadí-Moixeró, has a number of staffed refuges in the park for serious multiday hikes.
The villages used as jumping-off points for exploring the area are strung along the picturesque B400, which runs west from the Barcelona-bound C16 from Puigcerdà to La Seu d’Urgell on the C14. These include Saldes, Gósol, picturesque Josa del Cadí, and Tuixent. The valley makes a spectacular drive too, a longer but super-scenic route between Puigcerdà and La Seu d'Urgell.
Val d'Aran
Catalonia’s northernmost region, famous for its plunging valleys and snowy peaks, is an adventure playground for skiers and snowboarders. Baqueira-Beret's pistes lure the winter-sports jet-set. Meanwhile, charming villages like Salardú enchant hikers with views of cloud-scraping mountains. From Aran’s pretty side valleys, walkers can go over the mountains in any direction, notably southward to the Parc Nacional d’Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici.
It wasn't always this way: the Val d'Aran was an inaccessible outpost until the 1948 completion of a tunnel connecting the valley's main town Vielha to the rest of Spain. A surge of tourism development followed, allowing the world to experience this spectacular region of tumbling valleys dotted with stone-and-slate villages, many with notable Romanesque churches.
Thanks in part to its geography, Aran’s native language is not Catalan but Aranese (Aranés), which is a dialect of Occitan or the langue d’oc, the old Romance language of southern France.
Vielha
Pop 5474 / Elev 974m
A sprawl of stone-and-slate houses, winter-sports shops and holiday apartments make up hectic Vielha, often used as a base for exploring the Val d'Aran. While it doesn't have the charisma of the valley's smaller towns, Vielha's tiny centre, anchored by the distinctive spire of Sant Miquèu church, is packed with rustic restaurants, especially along the banks of the gushing Riu Garona. Vielha's outdoor-gear shops, supermarkets and accommodation choices make it a good place to circle your wagons before hiking or skiing. It's best to have your own wheels: the Vall de Boí's trekking terrain is a 20-minute drive south, while Baqueira's ski resorts are 20 minutes east.
4Sleeping & Eating
oHotel El CiervoBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€
(%973 64 01 65; www.hotelelciervo.net; Plaça de Sant Orenç 3; s/d incl breakfast €45/72; hclosed May–mid-Jun & mid-Oct–Nov; W)
Right in the centre of Vielha, this exceptionally welcoming hotel, a real departure from the mundane ski-town norm, feels like an alpine fairytale, with an exterior covered in paintings of trees and forest creatures and a delightfully cosy interior full of decorative touches. Each lovely room varies in style and feel but includes a hydromassage tub, and the breakfast spread is excellent. Good value, and even better midweek.
Hotel Ço de PierraHOTEL€€
(%973 64 13 34; www.hotelpierra.com; Carrèr Major 25; d incl breakfast €65-90; W)
In Betrén, a timeless village tacked on to the eastern end of Vielha’s sprawl (1km walk from the centre of town), this gorgeous place respects the stone-and-slate pattern of traditional housing and its 10 rooms combine stone, timber and terracotta for warmth.
Restaurant Gustavo (Era Móla)CATALAN, FRENCH€€
(Carrèr de Marrèc 14; mains €14-19; h8-11pm Mon-Tue & Thu-Fri, 1-3.30pm & 8-11.30pm Sat & Sun Dec-Apr & Jul-Sep)
One of the best restaurants in town. Expect carefully prepared local cooking with a heavy French hand, and savour the solomillo de cerdo al Calvados (pork fillet bathed in Calvados) and artistically arranged desserts.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%973 64 01 10; www.visitvaldaran.com; Carrèr de Sarriulèra 10; h10am-1.30pm & 4.30-8pm Mon-Sat)
This tourist-information point near Vielha's Sant Miquèu church operates longer hours in high season.
8Getting There & Around
Buses reach Vielha from Barcelona (€34.87, five to six hours, seven daily) and Lleida (€13.87, 2½ three hours, four or five daily).
ALSA (www.alsa.es) runs regular buses from Vielha up the valley as far as Baqueira. Most travellers explore the region by driving, though parking can be a problem. If you have no luck in the centre, there are often parking spaces north of the Mercadona supermarket along Avinguda Baile Calbeto Barra.
Arties
Pop 400 / Elev 1143m
Seven kilometres east of Vielha, this fetching village sits astride the confluence of the Garona and Valarties rivers. Arties' proximity to the upmarket Baqueira-Beret-Bonaigua ski area (just 6km east) has allowed upmarket hotels to flourish. The village snoozes outside peak summer and winter seasons, but is a pretty place to stop year-round: the balconies of its stone houses overflow with flowers while Romanesque Església de Santa Maria, with its three-storey belfry and triple apse, stands proudly in their midst.
8Getting There & Away
Buses reach Arties from Vielha (€1.10, 20 minutes, hourly), via Salardú.
Salardú
Pop 580 / Elev 1267m
Glamorous Arties is 3km to its west, chic ski area Baqueira is 3km east, yet pint-sized Salardú retains a more rugged, outdoorsy ambience than its neighbours. Salardú welcomes hikers with its decent budget and midrange digs. The village's architectural highlight is the jaw-strainingly lovely Romanesque Sant Andreu church; don't miss exploring inside. The even dinkier village of Bagergue, a tranquil spot well suited to solitary treks and boasting glorious mountain views, lies 2km to Salardú's northeast.
1Sights
Església de Sant AndrèuCHURCH
(Salardú; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm)
Within the remarkably colourful frescoed walls of this 12th- and 13th-century church, gaze upon the haunting form of the Crist de Salardú. This gaunt wooden sculpture of Jesus on the cross dates to the 13th century. Until 1649, Sant Andreu's sturdy belltower was a castle keep, though only the church and some ruined exterior castle walls remain today.
4Sleeping
Refugi RostaREFUGE€
(%973 64 53 08; www.refugirosta.com; Plaça Major 3; dm/d incl breakfast €26.50/73; pW)
Pyrenean mountain refugis are special, convivial places, and this creaky old building is one of the most characterful. There are no luxuries but there's plenty of good cheer, and the dormitories, with their typical side-by-side sleeping, are comfortable enough. Bring a sleeping bag or hire sheets and towels. The restaurant serves a cheap and hearty set menu.
Hotel SeixesHOTEL€€
(%973 64 54 06; www.seixes.com; Bagergue; s/d/tr/ste from €44/69/99/130; hApr-Nov; pW)
This hikers' favourite is situated within the sound of the pealing bell of Sant Feliu church in Bagergue, 2km north of Salardú. Its 17 rooms are comfortable though simple, and the location will appeal to nature lovers and solitude seekers. Staff are knowledgeable about local trekking routes.
8Getting There & Away
Buses reach Salardú from Vielha (€1.10, 20 minutes, hourly).
WORTH A TRIP
CATALONIA'S TOP SKI RESORT

Baqueira-Beret-Bonaigua Ski ResortSKIING
(www.baqueira.es; day lift pass adult/child €49/27.50; hlate Nov-early Apr)
Pound the pistes at Catalonia's top winter-sports resort, beloved of Spanish royals, European celebrities and loyal skiers. Its quality lift system gives access to pistes totalling around 150km (larger than any other Spanish resort), amid fine scenery at between 1500m and 2510m.
CENTRAL CATALONIA
Vic
Pop 41,956
This feisty Catalonian town combines dreamy medieval architecture with youthful energy. Remarkably restored Roman ruins and jazzy Modernista houses add to a spirited mix of architectural styles, while Plaça Major smoulders with a palette of ochre and brick-red mansions. The old quarter has meandering laneways that bypass chapels and cosy restaurants.
Despite its resolutely Catalan political outlook, the town is very multicultural; meanwhile its university keeps an activist buzz in the air. A day trip from Barcelona is enough to take in Vic's cathedral and the superb museum, plus a restaurant or two, but a longer stay allows time to get lost amid the street art and medieval alleyways.
1Sights
Plaça Major, the largest square in Catalonia, has a pleasing medley of medieval, baroque and Modernista architecture. A crop of cafes spill onto the square. It’s also the site of Vic’s twice-weekly market (Tuesday and Saturday mornings), which sells local food and cheap clothing. Around it swirl the narrow streets of medieval Vic, lined with mansions, churches and a 1st-century Roman temple, painstakingly restored during the 19th and 20th centuries.
oMuseu EpiscopalGALLERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.museuepiscopalvic.com; Plaça Bisbe Oliba 3; adult/child over 10 €7/3.50; h10am-1pm & 3-6pm Tue-Fri, 10am-7pm Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
This museum holds a marvellous collection of Romanesque and Gothic art, second only to the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya collection in Barcelona. The Romanesque collection depicts some strikingly gory images – from saints being beheaded or tortured to the Archangel Michael spearing a devil through his jaw. The Gothic collection contains works by such key figures as Lluís Borrassà and Jaume Huguet. Opens longer hours in high season. Arrive one hour before closing time to visit.
Catedral de Sant PereCATHEDRAL
( GOOGLE MAP ; Plaça de la Catedral; adult/child €2/free; h10am-1pm & 4-7pm)
Centuries of styles clash in Vic’s impressive cathedral. Most of the neoclassical exterior was built during the 18th century, but the Romanesque belltower is one of few remnants dating to the 11th century. Within, the Stations of the Cross are animated in colourful World War II–era frescoes, while Corinthian columns glow bronze in the darkness. Entrance to the cathedral itself is free – the listed prices apply to the cloisters, crypt and retaule (altarpiece).
zFestivals & Events
Mercat de RamEASTER MARKET
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.vicfires.cat; hEaster)
In the week running up to Palm Sunday, Plaça Major hosts the Mercat del Ram (Palm Market, a tradition that goes back to AD 875), selling palms and laurels. This agricultural fiesta showcases everything from tractors to equestrian displays, as well as local cheeses by the cartful. Rambla del Carme and Rambla del Passeig along the northern border of the old town fill with stalls selling cured meats, cheeses, coca (Easter cake) and other fantastic regional produce.
Mercat de Música VivaMUSIC
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.mmvv.net; hlate Sep)
The town hosts the Mercat de Música Viva, a big if somewhat chaotic event, over several days in September in which Catalan, national and foreign acts of various schools of Latin rock, pop and jazz get together to jam in locations around the city. Plan in advance via the website or find the information point off Plaça Major.
4Sleeping
Estació del NordHOTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %935 16 62 92; www.estaciodelnord.com; Plaça de l'Estació 4; s/d €50/60; paW)
Lodgings above a train station seldom inspire, but this family-run hotel goes against expectations. The owners are warm and accommodating, but they run a tight ship: rooms are immaculately clean, service is efficient, and the 14 rooms are well-maintained and soundproofed. There's free parking at a location nearby.
Seminari AllotjamentsGUESTHOUSE€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 86 15 55; www.seminarivic.cat; Ronda Francesc Camprodon 2; s/d/tr/q incl breakfast €56/71/83/110; paW)
Everything functions like clockwork at this modern guesthouse within a former seminary, 500m north of Vic's Plaça Major. Rooms are furnished simply and decorated in bold primary colours, spread across a cavernous seminary complex surrounding a courtyard (ideal for pensive strolls). It has a student ambience, but it's spotless, the staff are helpful and there is on-site parking (€7).
oEl JardinetCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 86 28 77; www.eljardinetdevic.com; Carrer de Corretgers 8; mains €18-23; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm Tue-Sat, 1-3.30pm Sun; W)
This warm-hearted restaurant has been perfecting Catalan cuisine since 1980, making it one of the best choices in town. There's an exceedingly good choice of mains, including a tower of trinxat (potato and cabbage with a pork garnish) and salads draped in melting goat's cheese. The artistically presented desserts resemble a surrealist sketch. Diners can choose between El Jardinet's minimalist interior or outdoor space.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 86 20 91; www.victurisme.cat; Plaça del Pes; h10am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Fri, 10am-2pm & 4-7pm Sat, 10.30am-1.30pm Sun)
Just off Plaça Major within the town hall building, this tourist office has friendly, multilingual staff who can offer a host of suggestions about exploring Vic and the surrounding area. The interior also has some exhibits on Catalan culture plus a small selection of souvenirs.
8Getting There & Away
Regular rodalies trains (line R3) run from Barcelona (€6.15, one to 1½ hours).
Montserrat
Montserrat, 50km northwest of Barcelona, is at the heart of Catalan identity for its mountain, monastery and the natural park weaving among its distinctive rock formations. Montserrat mountain is instantly recognisable for its rock formations, sculpted over millennia by wind and frost. These turrets of rock, a coarse conglomerate of limestone and eroded fragments, extend like gnarled fingers from its 1236m-high bulk. More than halfway up the mountain lies the Benedictine Monestir de Montserrat, home to the Black Virgin, one of Spain’s most revered icons. Extending from this sacred spot is the Parc Natural de de la Muntanya de Montserrat, superlative hiking terrain where brooks tumble into ravines and lookout points boast panoramas of rocky pillars
Montserrat (often used interchangeably to mean the monastery and mountain) is a very popular day-trip from Barcelona. The monastery complex throngs with visitors, but serenity can be found on the walking trails or by staying overnight.
History
The monastery – Spain's second most important pilgrimage centre after Santiago – was founded in 1025. Most of the complex was built around the Virgen de Montserrat, a stunning icon dating to the 12th century (though traditionalists declare it was carved by St Luke and hidden by St Peter in the mountains). The monastery was wrecked by Napoleon’s troops in 1811, then largely abandoned as a result of anticlerical legislation in the 1830s, and slowly rebuilt from 1858. Today a community of a few dozen monks lives here. Pilgrims come from far and wide to venerate the Virgen de Montserrat, affectionately known as La Moreneta (‘the Little Brown One’ or ‘the Black Madonna’), a Romanesque dark wooden sculpture of a regal-looking Mary holding the infant Jesus on her lap, holding a globe, which pilgrims come to touch. She has been Catalonia’s patroness since 1881 and her blessing is particularly sought by newlyweds. Colourful legends have sprung up around this holy place, including a folk tale that described jagged Montserrat mountain as sawn by angels to make a throne for the Virgin Mary.
1Sights
Monestir de MontserratMONASTERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.abadiamontserrat.net; hbasilica 7.30-10.30am & 12.15-6.15pm)
Catalonia's most renowned monastery was founded in 1025 to commemorate visions of the Virgin Mary, accompanied by celestial light and a chorus of holy music, experienced by shepherds. The monastery complex encompasses two blocks: on one side, the basilica and monastery buildings (housing a religious community of more than 100), and on the other, facilities for tourists and pilgrims. Admirable monastery architecture in Plaça de Santa Maria includes a gleaming late-19th-century facade depicting St George and St Benedict in relief, and 15th-century cloisters.
BasilicaCHURCH
(www.abadiamontserrat.net; h7.30am-8pm)F
The open courtyard in front of the basilica immediately sets an impressive tone, with marbled floors and art nouveau–style frescoes visible between elegant archways. The basilica's brick facade features carvings of Christ and the 12 Apostles, dating to the early 20th century. Beyond its heavy doors, the interior glitters with white marble and gold, a blend of Renaissance and Catalan styles.
Cambril de la Mare de DéuCHURCH
(h7-10.30am & 12.15-6.15pm)F
Follow signs to the Cambril de la Mare de Déu to the right of Montserrat's main basilica entrance to see the 'Black Virgin', a revered 12th-century statue of the Virgin Mary with Jesus seated on her knee.
Museu de MontserratMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.museudemontserrat.com; Plaça de Santa Maria; adult/student €7/6, €11 with Espai Audiovisual; h10am-5.45pm Mon-Fri, 10am-6.45pm Sat & Sun)
This museum has an excellent collection, ranging from an Egyptian mummy and Gothic altarpieces to fine canvases by Caravaggio, El Greco, Picasso and several Impressionists, as well as a comprehensive collection of 20th-century classic Catalan art and some fantastic Orthodox icons.
2Activities
Beyond the touristic hubbub surrounding Montserrat's monastery and basilica, there's tranquillity to be found in the web of walking trails across the mountain. Take the Funicular de Sant Joan (one-way/return €2.40/3.70; hevery 20min 10am-4.50pm) for the first 250m uphill from the monastery; alternatively, it's a 45-minute walk along the road between the funicular's bottom and top stations. From the top, it's a further 20-minute stroll (signposted) to the Sant Joan chapel, with fine westward views.
More exciting is the one-hour walk northwest, along a path marked with some blobs of yellow paint, to Montserrat's highest peak, Sant Jeroni, from where there's a sheer drop on the north face. The walk takes you across the upper part of the mountain, with a close-up experience of some of the rock pillars. Before setting out, check ahead with the Information Office regarding weather and trail conditions, wear good walking boots, and bring water.
4Sleeping
Hotel Abat CisnerosHOTEL€€
(%938 77 77 01; www.montserratvisita.com; s/d incl breakfast €63.75/109.90; pW)
The only hotel in the monastery complex has a superb location next to the basilica. Rooms are comfortable though simple; some make up for the spartan decor with views overlooking Plaça de Santa Maria. There are also inexpensive basic apartments and family packages available. Its restaurant serves imaginative Catalonian dishes (mains €17 to €20).
3Entertainment
Escolanía de MontserratCHORAL MUSIC
(www.escolania.cat; hperformances 1pm Mon-Thu, 11am Sun, 6.45pm Sun-Thu)
The clear voices of one of Europe's oldest boys' choirs have echoed through the basilica since the 14th century. The choir performs briefly on most days (except school holidays), singing Virolai, written by Catalonia’s national poet Jacint Verdaguer, and Salve Regina. The 53 escolanets, aged between nine and 14, go to boarding school in Montserrat and must endure a two-year selection process to join the choir. Check performance times on the website.
8Information
Information OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%938 77 77 77; www.montserratvisita.com; h9am-5.45pm Mon-Fri, 9am-8pm Sat & Sun)
Located in the monastery, this information point has details on the monastery complex and walking trails around Montserrat. Hours vary by season.
8Getting There & Away
The R5 line trains operated by FGC (www.fgc.net) run half-hourly to hourly from Barcelona's Plaça d’Espanya station. Services start at 6.36am (one hour), but take the 8.36am to connect with the first AERI cable car (%938 35 00 05; www.aeridemontserrat.com; one-way/return €7/10; h9.40am-7pm, closed mid-late Jan) from the Montserrat Aeri stop (every 15 minutes from 9.40am to 7pm, five minutes, operating shorter hours from November to February). Alternatively take the cremallera ( GOOGLE MAP ; %902 31 20 20; www.cremallerademontserrat.com; 1-way/return €6.30/10) train up to the monastery from the following R5 stop, Monistrol de Montserrat. There are various train/cremallera combo tickets available.
By car, take the C16 from Barcelona, then the C58 shortly after Terrassa, followed by the C55 to Monistrol de Montserrat. You can leave your vehicle at the free car park and take the cremallera up to the top or drive up and park (cars €6.50).
Cardona
Pop 4921
Long before arrival, you spy in the distance the outline of an impregnable 18th-century fortress high above Cardona. Once ruled by the self-styled ‘Lords of Salt’, who brought Cardona wealth by mining the Muntanya de Sal (mountain of salt), today the castle (now housing a parador – a sumptuous state-owned hotel) lures tourists to admire its stocky watchtowers and Romanesque church. Aside from this standout attraction, Cardona is a sleepy place, best experienced as an atmospheric day-trip or stopover between Barcelona and the Pyrenees.
1Sights
Castell de CardonaCASTLE
F
Visible long before entering Cardona, this fortress tops a hill that broods above the modern town. From this strategic position, centuries of noblemen have kept a watchful eye over Cardona's Muntanya de Sal (Salt Mountain), the 'white gold' that gave Cardona its wealth. The ramparts have panoramic views of the vast Lleida plain; the loftiest vantage point is the Torre de la Minyona. It's free to wander around the castle, but sights within the complex have separate admission charges.
Església de Sant VicençCHURCH
(Castell de Cardona; adult/child €3.50/2.50; h10am-1pm & 3-5pm Tue-Sun, to 7pm Jun-Sep)
This Romanesque church within Cardona's castle complex has an elegant stone-walled interior. The vaulted crypt, dedicated to St James, is a stopping point for pilgrims plying the French Way of St James route to Santiago de Compostela. Buy tickets to the church in the tourist information booth within the castle complex and staff will unlock the door.
4Sleeping & Eating
oParador Ducs de CardonaHISTORIC HOTEL€€
(%938 69 12 75; www.parador.es; d incl breakfast €115; paiW)
Rooms are within an adjoining modern building, but that doesn't dim the magic of staying at this parador within the medieval Castell de Cardona. Lodgings are large and comfortable, many with exceptional views over Cardona. Common areas are resplendent with antique furnishings and display cases of historic finery. The highlight is breakfasting under the Gothic arches of a converted monks' refectory.
oLa Volta del RectorMODERN EUROPEAN€€€
(%938 69 16 37; http://lavoltadelrector.cat; Carrer de les Flors 4; mains from €18; h1.30-3pm & 8-11pm Tue-Sun; v)
Dine like a duke in the heart of medieval Cardona. Twelfth-century stone walls mix with wild violet decor at La Volta del Rector, where the atmosphere is rustic, romantic and hip all at once. Dishes, from grills to wild game and salmon carpaccio, are whipped up with flair, while a wine list of the region's best drops is accompanied by enthusiastic recommendations.
8Getting There & Away
Cardona is served by ALSA buses from Barcelona (€12.85, two hours, two to four daily) and Manresa (€4.40, one hour, hourly Monday to Friday, three daily at weekends).
The bus station is just north of the tourist office by the side of the BV3001 road.
Lleida
Pop 138,416
Lleida’s battletorn history has faded into memory, replaced by a pacey, workaday vibe. During the 14th and 15th centuries, this arid, inland city was a centre of economic activity, fed in part by Jewish and Muslim communities. Culture and art flourished, thanks to surrounding monasteries and a university founded in 1300. Relics of the holy cloth and thorns made Lleida’s cathedral a revered stopping point on the Way of St James pilgrimage route.
Battle lines were drawn here across Catalonia’s history, with Lleida nearly always backing the losing side. The old town was reduced to rubble during the War of the Spanish Succession. The conquerors built a citadel to protect their new acquisitions, only for it to be sacked by the French in 1812.
The fortress-cathedral crowning the city, La Seu Vella, evokes Lleida’s former grandeur, while a scattering of museums and Modernista buildings offer reasons to linger.
1Sights
oLa Seu VellaCATHEDRAL
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.turoseuvella.cat; cathedral/cathedral plus tower €7/5; h10am-1.30pm & 3-5.30pm Tue-Fri, 10am-5.30pm Sat, 10am-3pm Sun)
Lleida’s ‘old cathedral’, enclosed within a later fortress complex, towers above the city from its commanding hilltop location. Work began on the cathedral in 1203, though today it is a masterpiece of the Transitional style, with bold Romanesque forms complemented by Gothic vaults and elaborate tracery. The octagonal bell tower, crowned with Gothic flourishes, rises at the southwest end of the beautiful cloisters, a forest of slender columns from which you can gaze at expansive views over Lleida.
Church of Sant LlorençCHURCH
( GOOGLE MAP ; Plaça Sant Josep; h9.30am-12.30pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri, 10am-1.30pm & 5-8pm Sat & Sun)F
This well-refurbished 12th-century Romanesque church is worth admiring for its elegant octagonal belltower and the gargoyles leaping from its eaves.
Museu de LleidaMUSEUM
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.museudelleida.cat; Carrer del Sant Crist 1; adult/child €5/2.50; h10am-2pm & 4-6pm Tue-Thu & Sat, 10am-2pm Fri & Sun)
This expansive museum brings together artefacts reaching back to the Stone Age, through Roman remains and medieval art into the 19th century. Highlights include the atmospherically lit collection of medieval religious sculptures and the delicate 1st- to 5th-century mosaics from the El Romeral mansion, a patchwork of peacock feathers and leaves.
Castell de GardenyCASTLE
( GOOGLE MAP ; Turó de Gardeny; adult/child €2.60/1.60; h10am-1.30pm Sat & Sun)
The Knights Templar built a monastery complex here shortly after Lleida was taken from the Muslims in 1149. It was later expanded into a fortress in the 17th century. Today you can still see the original Romanesque Església de Santa Maria de Gardeny and a hefty tower. An imaginative audiovisual display (in Spanish or Catalan) lends insight into the monastic life of the Knights Templar.
Museu d’Art Jaume MoreraGALLERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; http://mmorera.paeria.es; Carrer Major 31; hnoon-2pm & 5-8pm Tue-Sat, 11am-2pm Sun)F
This impressive collection of Catalan art focuses particularly on work by Lleida-associated artists, such as the surrealist sculptures by Leandre Cristòfol, with excellent temporary photography exhibitions held here as well.
zFestivals & Events
Aplec del CargolFOOD
( GOOGLE MAP ; http://aplec.org; hlate May)
Munch on molluscs at Lleida's annual snail-eating festival.
4Sleeping & Eating
Hotel RealHOTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 23 94 05; www.hotelreallleida.com; Avinguda de Blondel 22; r €41-56; paW)
A modern mid-rise place, business-oriented Hotel Real overlooks the river near the train and bus stations. The rooms are bright and clean; the better ones have generous balconies and all have decent bathrooms. Very good value.
Hotel ZenitHOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 22 91 91; http://lleida.zenithoteles.com; Carrer General Brito 21; d/tr from €62/82; paW)
This business-focused hotel is somewhat bland, but makes up for it with comfortable rooms in a simple palette of beige and white, good wi-fi speed, and helpful multilingual staff. It's well-located to explore the city, with La Seu Vella and Lleida's museums barely a 10-minute stroll from the hotel. Parking costs an additional €10.
El Cau de Sant LlorençCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 28 91 63; www.elcaudesantllorenç.com; Plaça Sant Josep 4; mains €14-19; h1-3.30pm & 9-11.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-3.30pm Sun)
On a quiet night, it's all rather hush-hush in this old-town corner. But once you get buzzed in, it's as if you've entered a private club: excellent service, elegant contemporary decor and smartly presented modern Catalan cuisine.
ol’estel de la MercèCATALAN, FUSION€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 28 80 08; www.lesteldelamerce.com; Carrer Cardenal Cisneros 30; mains €16-25; h1-4pm & 8.30-11.30pm Wed-Sat, 1-4pm Tue & Sun)
A 1.5km walk from central Lleida, this sleek fine-dining place creates fusion dishes using fresh seasonal produce. Feast on the likes of crispy suckling pig terrine with orange and cloves, Asian-inspired fish dishes like tuna on crispy rice, and strawberries flambéed with pepper.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %973 70 03 19; www.turismedelleida.cat; Carrer Major 31; h10am-1.30pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 10am-1pm Sun)
This friendly tourist office on the main pedestrian street has maps and local tips galore. There's another branch in the cathedral complex, whose opening hours follow those of La Seu Vella.
8Getting There & Away
From the centrally located bus station ( GOOGLE MAP ; off Avenida Blondel), southwest of the old town, off Avenida Blondel, regular services include Zaragoza (€11.38, 1¾ to 2½ hours, three to five daily), Barcelona and El Prat airport (€21, two to 3¼ hours, 12 to 18 daily); Vielha (€13.87, 2½ to three hours, seven to nine daily) and La Seu d’Urgell (€19.25, 2¼ hours, four daily).
Regular trains reach Barcelona from Lleida (€17.65 to €42.60, one hour), with some proceeding to Madrid (€51.15 to €123.20, two hours, 10 daily) via Zaragoza (€14.85 to €27.10, one hour).
WORTH A TRIP
CISTERCIAN ROUTE

Cistercian RouteMONASTERIES
(Ruta del Cister; www.larutadelcister.info; combined 3-monastery ticket €12)
A combined ticket gives access to three monasteries on the Cistercian Route, plus discounts on other regional museums. Tackling all three in a single day-trip from Tarragona is doable if you start early, but it requires careful timing: some visits are by irregular guided tours only. Start with Santa Maria de Poblet (whose long lunch hour can disrupt day-trip schedules), before heading to Reial Monestir de Santes Creus. Finish with Santa Maria de Vallbona de les Monges, the latest closing of the trio.
oReial Monestir de Santes CreusMONASTERY
(Plaça de Jaume el Just, Santes Creus; adult/senior & student €4.50/3.50; h10am-6.30pm Jun-Sep, 10am-5pm Oct-May)
An atmosphere of awe descends before entering the monastery, in broad Plaça de Sant Bernat Calbó: its mix of architectural styles spans six centuries, including retired monks' quarters and an ornamental 18th-century fountain. Behind the monastery's Romanesque and Gothic facade lies a 14th-century sandstone cloister, a 12th-century chapter house whose ceiling ripples with rib-shaped vaults, a cavernous dormitory, and royal apartments where the comtes-reis (count-kings; rulers of the joint state of Catalonia and Aragón) often stayed. There's also a church, whose construction began in the 12th century.
Reial Monestir de Santa Maria de PobletMONASTERY
(www.poblet.cat; Vimbodí-Poblet; adult/student €7.50/4.50; h10am-12.30pm & 3-5.30pm Mon-Sat, 10.30am-12.30pm & 3-5.30pm Sun)
The largest monastery of the Cistercian Route, Unesco-listed Santa Maria de Poblet was founded by monks from southern France in 1150. It rose rapidly to become Catalonia’s most powerful monastery. Highlights include the mostly Gothic main cloister and the alabaster sculptural treasures of the Panteón de los Reyes (Kings’ Pantheon). The raised alabaster sarcophagi contain such greats as Jaume I (the conqueror of Mallorca and Valencia) and Pere III. Entry is strictly by semi-guided tours (Catalan and Spanish), which operate every 20 minutes during opening hours.
Reial Monestir de Santa Maria de Vallbona de les MongesCONVENT
(%973 33 02 66; www.monestirvallbona.cat; Carrer Major, Vallbona de les Monges; adult/child €4/1; h10.30am-1.30pm & 4.30-6.45pm Tue-Sat, noon-1.30pm & 4.30-6.45pm Sun Mar-Oct, closes 5.30pm rest of year)
A dozen monges (nuns) still live and pray at this 12th-century institution, the only women's monastery along the Cistercian Route. The monastery has undergone years of restoration, which has finally cleared up most of the remaining civil-war damage. Queen Violant of Hungary, a queen consort of Aragon and formidable political influencer, is entombed within (note the bilingual plaque outside the monastery in Catalan and Hungarian). Visits are by guided tour (Spanish or Catalan).
4Sleeping
Fèlix HotelHOTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %977 60 90 90; http://felixhotel.net; Ctra N240, Km 17, Valls; s/d €54/62; pW)
This comfortable, if slightly creaky, hotel has rooms as cosy and ample as the welcome. It's well located for monastery-hopping along the Cistercian Route and also makes an excellent alternative to staying in central Tarragona (with free parking to boot). Fèlix Hotel is 17km north of Tarragona in quiet Valls.
COSTA DAURADA & AROUND
Sitges
Pop 28,171
Just 35km along the coast southwest of Barcelona, Sitges sizzles with beach life, nightclubs and an enviable clutch of festivals. Sitges has been a resort town since the 19th century, and was a key location for the Modernisme movement, which paved the way for the likes of Picasso. These days it’s Spain’s most famous gay holiday destination. In July and August the town cranks up the volume to become one big beach party, while Carnaval unbridles Sitges’ hedonistic side. But despite bacchanalian nightlife, Sitges remains a classy destination: its array of galleries and museums belie its small size, there’s a good sprinkling of upmarket restaurants in its historic centre, and an October film festival draws culture fiends from miles around. The town is quieter during the off-season, but you can still experience a taste of nightlife and culture.
1Sights
The most beautiful part of Sitges is the headland area, where noble Modernista palaces and mansions strike poses in the streets around the striking Església de Sant Bartomeu i Santa Tecla, with the blue sea as a backdrop.
oMuseu Cau FerratMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.museusdesitges.cat; Carrer de Fonollar; incl Museu Maricel adult/reduced €10/7; h10am-7pm Tue-Sun)
Built in the 1890s as a house-cum-studio by artist Santiago Rusiñol, a pioneer of the Modernisme movement, this mansion is crammed with his own art and that of his contemporaries, including his friend Picasso, as well as his own collection of ancient relics and antiques. The visual feast is piled high, from Grecian urns and a 15th-century baptismal font to 18th-century tilework that glitters all the way to the floral-painted wood-beamed ceiling.
Fundació Stämpfli Art ContemporaniGALLERY
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.fundacio-stampfli.org; Plaça de l'Ajuntament 13; adult/child €5/3.50; h3.30-7pm Fri, 10am-2pm & 5-7pm Sat, 11am-3pm Sun)
Within an old wood-beamed fish-market building is this slick 20th-century art gallery. Whitewashed walls and shiny tiled floors draw all eyes to the primary colours of bold pop art and modern art within. Pucker up for Peter Stämpfli's Rouge baiser (an enormous cerise pair of lips), alongside works by Arroyo, Cueco and other greats. The lower floor has rotating temporary exhibitions. The museum runs extended hours in high season.
Museu RomànticMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.museusdesitges.cat; Carrer de Sant Gaudenci 1)
Housed in a late-18th-century Can Llopis mansion, this faded museum recreates with its furnishings and dioramas the lifestyle of a 19th-century Catalan landowning family. Closed for renovations during our visit, the museum was due to reopen in 2016.
Església de Sant Bartomeu i Santa TeclaCHURCH
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Plaça de l'Ajuntament)
Sitges' most striking landmark is this 17th-century parish church, sitting proudly on a rocky elevation that separates the 2km-long main beach to the southwest from the smaller, quieter Platja de Sant Sebastià to the northeast. Opening hours vary.
Beaches
The main beach is flanked by the attractive seafront Passeig Maritim, dotted with chiringuitos (beachside bars) and divided into nine sections with different names by a series of breakwaters. West of the centre, Anquines ( GOOGLE MAP ) and Terramar ( GOOGLE MAP ) beaches have paddleboat rental and deck chairs during the summer. East of the headland find St Sebastià ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ), Balmins and fine brown-sanded D’aiguadolç beaches. Though Bassa Rodona ( GOOGLE MAP ) used to be the unofficial ‘gay beach’, gay sunbathers are now spread out pretty evenly, while Balmins is the sheltered bay favoured by nudists.
Platja de la RiberaBEACH
( MAP GOOGLE MAP )
One of Sitges' more popular places to soak up the sun.
Platja de la FragataBEACH
( MAP GOOGLE MAP )
Lively Sitges beach close to Sant Bartomeu church.
zFestivals & Events
CarnavalCARNIVAL
(www.carnavaldesitges.com; hFeb/Mar)
Carnaval in Sitges is a week-long booze-soaked riot made for extroverts and exhibitionists, complete with masked balls and capped by extravagant gay parades held on the Sunday and the Tuesday night, featuring flamboyantly dressed drag queens, giant sound systems and a wild all-night party with bars staying open until dawn. Dates change from year to year; check the website.
Festa MajorTOWN FESTIVAL
(www.sitgesfestamajor.cat; hmid-Aug)
The town’s Festa Major, held over six days in honour of Sitges’ patron saint, features a huge fireworks display on the 23rd as well as numerous processions, sardanas (sardanes in Catalan; traditional dances) and fire-breathing beasts.
International Film FestivalFILM
(Festival Internacional de Cinema Fantàstic de Catalunya; www.sitgesfilmfestival.com; hOct)
Early October brings the world's best festival of fantasy and horror films. Cutting-edge sci-fi and blood-curdling cinema is shown in venues across Sitges. Book tickets for individual showings if possible, as the best sell out in advance. But you can still rock up to ticket booths and get lucky on the day.
4Sleeping
Utopia Beach HouseHOSTEL, HOTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 11 11 36; www.utopiasitges.com; Carrer Socias 22; dm/d from €12/32; W)
Tucked away from Passeig Maritim and a short walk from the beach, this bubbly place has a choice of pastel-painted dorm rooms, double rooms with private bathrooms, and apartments (available from June to September). It has a cheerful bar area amid a leafy garden, a colourful hangout lounge with mini-library, laundry facilities (€3), noticeboards with local tips, and everything you need for a fun-packed stay.
Parrots HotelHOTEL€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %938 94 13 50; www.parrotshotel.com; Calle de Joan Tarrida 16; d €99-130; hmid-Feb–Oct; aiW)
It’s hard to miss this bright-blue gay hotel. Courteous staff usher you towards thoroughly modern rooms with cable TV and air-con, there are balconies for people-watching, and a sauna to get steamy in. It's right in the heart of the action.
Sitges Beach HostelHOSTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 94 62 74; www.sitgesbeachhostel.com; Calle Anselm Clavé 9; dm/d €35/66; hmid-Jan–mid-Dec; aW)
This breezy place sits near the beach, a five-minute walk west of the centre. Comfortable dorms are pricey, but you get plenty for your euro, with cheap meals available, plenty of outdoor terrace and balcony space to relax in, plus a sociable lounge.
Hotel PlatjadorHOTEL€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %938 94 50 54; www.hotelsitges.com; Passeig de la Ribera 35; s/d €107/134; aiWs)
This welcoming seafront hotel has fabulous rooms (many with balconies) featuring enormous plush beds and mountains of pillows. It has an indoor pool and there's a rooftop bar overlooking the sea. It's superb value off-season.
5Eating
Lady GreenVEGETARIAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer de Sant Pau 11; mains €9-12; h7-11pm Wed & Fri, 1-4pm & 7-11pm Thu, Sat & Sun; v)
Zucchini noodles glistening with pesto, zesty Mexican platters and delectable American-style cheesecake: this vegetarian cafe will satisfy even the most demanding tastebuds with inventive meat-free dishes and wonderful desserts. There are also choices for vegan and gluten-free diners, plus a range of invigorating fresh juices and smoothies.
El PouTAPAS€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.elpoudesitges.com; Carrer de Sant Pau 5; dishes €4-10; h1.30-4pm & 8-11.30pm Thu-Sun, 8-11.30pm Mon & Wed; W)
Tiny Wagyu beef burgers, meatballs with cuttlefish, and classics like anchovies and local cheese crowd tables at this friendly gourmet tapas place. The presentation delights the eye as much as the flavours delight the palate.
La SalsetaCATALAN€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %938 11 04 19; www.lasalseta.com; Carrer de Sant Pau 35; mains €12-19; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11.30pm Wed-Sat, Tue & Sun 1-3.30pm)S
Slow food and seasonal produce dominate the menu of this homey restaurant, with crisp pig's feet with Catalan blood sausage, succulent Penedès chicken and a range of paella dishes the highlights of a thoroughly satisfying menu.
eF & GiFUSION€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %938 11 33 07; Carrer Major 33; mains €18-25; h1-4pm & 8-11.30pm Wed-Mon Mar-Jan; W)
Fabio and Greg (eF & Gi) are not afraid to experiment and the results are startlingly good: the mostly Mediterranean menu, with touches of Asian inspiration, throws out such delights as chargrilled beef infused with lemongrass and kaffir lime, and tuna loin encrusted with peanuts and kalamata olives with mango chutney. Don’t skip the dessert, either.
6Drinking & Nightlife
Much of Sitges’ nightlife happens on one short pedestrian strip packed night-long in summer: Carrer 1er de Maig aka Calle del Pecado (Sin Street), Plaça de la Indústria and Carrer Marquès de Montroig, all in a short line off the seafront, though most bars shut by around 3.30am. All-night revellers are drawn to the clubs just outside of town; the popular ones change name regularly, but you'll soon find out what is trendy this summer.
oCasablancaBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Carrer Pau Barrabeig 5; h8pm-2am Thu-Sat, Tue-Sun in high season)
This cocktail-driven bar exudes nostalgia with its old-timey soundtrack, bygone Hollywood stars crowding its walls and vintage furnishings. A selection of classy cocktails are stirred with aplomb by seasoned staff who extend an exuberant welcome to newcomers.
oBar VoramarBAR
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.pub-voramar.com; Carrer del Port Alegre 55; h4.30pm-1am Thu-Tue)
On Platja de Sant Sebastià, this is a fabulous old-time bar decked out like a ship playing flamenco, jazz and more. It does brilliant caipirinhas, mojitos and more. The chummy booth seating is a Sitges classic.
8Information
Main Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 94 42 51; www.sitgestur.cat; Plaça de E Maristany 2; h10am-2pm & 4-6.30pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
Information office by the train station. Opens until 8pm during high season (except Sundays).
8Getting There & Away
From about 5am to 10pm regular R2 rodalies trains run to Barcelona’s Passeig de Gràcia and Estació Sants (€4.10, 45 minutes). You can reach Barcelona airport by changing at El Prat de Llobregat. Buses ( GOOGLE MAP ; www.monbus.cat) also run to the airport from Passeig de Vilafranca (€6.50, 35 minutes, half-hourly to hourly).
CATALAN WINE

Throughout two-and-a-half millennia of wine production, it’s safe to say Catalonia has had time to finesse its local drops. With the days of Roman vineyards and medieval monastery wine-making long past, modern Catalonia now has 12 denominaciones de origen (DO) and has birthed boozy innovations like sparkling cava.
Penedès’ wine country is justly famous for these Champagne-style sparkling wines, ranging in taste from dry and flinty to sweet, plus fruity whites from Macabeo, Xarel·lo and other varietals. Other notable wine-making zones include Priorat, which produces aromatic, full-bodied reds, particularly from cariñena (carignan) and garnacha (grenache) grapes, and Costers del Segre, which comprises several fairly distinct subregions and produces quality whites and reds from a wide variety of grapes including macabeo, chardonnay, monastrell and cabernet sauvignon. The Raimat subregion is particularly worthy of attention. Wine tourism here has seen recent investment, with new routes allowing you to tour vineyards by jeep or bicycle; learn more on www.catalunya.com/what-to-do/enotourism.
Penedès Wine Country
Some of Spain’s finest wines come from the Penedès plains southwest of Barcelona. Sant Sadurní d’Anoia, located about 35km west of Barcelona, is the capital of cava, a sparkling, champagne-style wine popular worldwide, and glugged across Spain, particularly at Christmas. Vilafranca del Penedès, 12km further southwest, is an attractive historical town and the heart of the Penedès Denominació de Origen (DO; Denomination of Origin) region, which produces noteworthy light whites and some very tasty reds.
TASTING IN PENEDES

It’s easier to get around the wine country if you have your own wheels, though several companies run tours of the wineries from Barcelona (which can be a good option, if you’re intent on serious wine sampling). Visitors are welcome to tour several of the region’s wineries, though advance booking is essential in most places. The more enthusiastic ones will show you how cava and/or other wines are made and finish off with a glass or two. Tours generally last about 1½ hours and some may only be in Catalan and/or Spanish.
Browse www.dopenedes.es and www.enoturismepenedes.cat for more wine-tourism options.
Codorníu (%93 891 33 42; www.codorniu.es; Avinguda de Jaume Codorníu, Sant Sadurní d’Anoia; adult/child €9/6; h9am-5pm Mon-Fri, to 1pm Sat & Sun) There is no more glorious spot to quaff sparkling wine than the vaulted interior of Codorníu's palatial Modernista headquarters, at the entry to Sant Sadurní d’Anoia when coming by road from Barcelona. Codorníu's wine-making activities are said to be documented right back to the 16th century. Manuel Raventós, credited with bringing this wine-maker into the big time during the late 19th century, was the first to create sparkling Spanish wine by the Champagne method back in 1872.
Giró Ribot (%938 97 40 50; www.giroribot.es; Finca el Pont) The magnificent farm buildings ooze centuries of tradition. This winery uses mostly local grape varieties to produce a limited range of fine cava and wines (including muscat). Visits are seasonal and must be booked in advance. Prices depend on the experience. The winery is 7km north of Vilafranca, just beyond the village of Santa Fe del Penedès.
Jean León (%938 17 76 90; www.jeanleon.com; Camí Mas de Rovira, Torrelavit; adult/child €10.25/free; h9am-5pm Mon-Fri, 9am-1pm Sat & Sun) Since 1963 this winery has been using cabernet sauvignon and other French varietals to create various high-quality wines. Visits to this wonderfully scenic vineyard are multilingual but must be booked in advance.
Torres (%938 17 73 30; www.torres.es; vineyard tour adult/child €7.80/5.50; h9am-4pm Mon-Sat, to noon Sun & holidays) Just 2km northwest of Vilafranca on the BP2121, this is the area’s premier winemaker, with a family wine-making tradition dating from the 17th century. It revolutionised Spanish wine-making in the 1960s by introducing temperature-controlled, stainless-steel technology and French grape varieties. Torres produces an array of reds and whites of all qualities, using many grape varieties.
Sant Sadurní d'Anoia
Pop 12,590
One hundred or so wineries around Sant Sadurní make it the centre of cava, made by the same method as French champagne. Beyond the popping corks in Sant Sadurni's surrounds, the town is a sleepy place, though it has a pleasingly rich calendar of food and wine festivals.
2Activities
FreixenetWINE
(%938 91 70 96; www.freixenet.com; Carrer de Joan Sala 2, Sant Sadurní d’Anoia; adult/child 9-17 €7.50/4.50; h1½hr tours 10am-1pm & 3-4.30pm Mon-Thu, 10am-1pm Fri-Sun)
The biggest cava-producing company, easily accessible next to the Sant Sadurní train station. Book ahead for visits that include a tour of its 1920s cellar, a spin on the tourist train around the property and samples of its cava. If you don't book a tour, you can still sample top fizz and platters of ham and nibbles in the atmospheric tasting room.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
(%938 91 31 88; http://turismesantsadurni.com; Carrer Hospital 23; h9.15am-2.45pm & 4-6.30pm Tue-Fri, 10am-2pm & 4.30-7pm Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
Learn about food festivals and book winery tours and more at this information office.
8Getting There & Away
Rodalies trains run from Barcelona's Estació Sants to Sant Sadurní (€4.10, 45 minutes, half-hourly). By car, take the A2 north from Barcelona follow signs west at Martorell.
Vilafranca del Penedès
Pop 39,221
To experience Penedès wine country without attaching yourself to a long guided tour or renting a car (a burden, if you want to sip greedily), base yourself in Vilafranca. Livelier than Sant Sadurní, the town spreads over quite an area, but its centre has uplifting medieval architecture and a seam of truly excellent restaurants with wine lists to match. Vineyard excursions are easy to organise from here, and the town makes a charming (though fattening) weekend break.
1Sights
VinseumMUSEUM
(Museu de les Cultures del Vi de Catalunya; GOOGLE MAP ; www.vinseum.cat; Plaça de Jaume I 5; adult/child €7/4; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
Set down your cava glass for a moment and school yourself on the history and cultural significance of wine in Penedès. This 17,000-item collection pores over ancient vine-cultivation techniques, and offers interesting detail on the evolution of wine-making in the area. Outside summer, the museum closes for lunch between 2pm and 4pm.
TTours
Catalunya Bus Turístic conducts day tours that include visits to three bodegas, cheese and wine matching and tapas.
oEl Molí ToursCYCLING, WINERY TOUR
(%938 97 22 07; www.elmolitours.com; Torreles de Foix; half-day €70)
This highly recommended tour company, headed by the indomitable Paddy, arranges all manner of tours around wine country – from luxury gourmet day tours to numerous cycling options, such as half-/full-day guided bike tours that include lunch and cava sampling.
4Sleeping & Eating
Mercer Casa Torner i GüellBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 17 47 55; www.casatorneriguell.com; Calle Rambla de Sant Francesc 26; d/ste from €100/140)
The voluminous rooms at this central hotel have a sleek feel, with a mix of monochrome, mauve and faux-leather furnishings, while the bar area and reception are achingly glamorous. The result is somewhere between trendy and romantic, and it's all ideally located to explore Vilafranca's excellent restaurants.
El ConventCATALAN€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %931 69 43 84; Carrer de la Fruita 12; mains €10-15; h9am-1pm & 6.30pm-12.30am Tue-Fri, 9am-4pm & 7pm-midnight Sat)
This warren-like tavern has fantastically good-value set menus (three courses €20) packed with well-executed Catalan specials. Temptations range from juicy Iberico pork steaks to cloud-like desserts of yoghurt and fruit.
oCal TonCATALAN€€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 90 37 41; www.restaurantcalton.com; Carrer Casal 8; mains €16-24; h1-4pm & 8.30-10.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-4pm Sun)
An evening of gastronomic wonder awaits at Cal Ton. From feather-light potato and prawn ravioli to spider crab rice, meals at this crisp, modern restaurant exhaust superlatives. Meanwhile the unpretentious yet knowledgeable service ensures the perfect local wine to complement any dish. The quivering chocolate fondant with passionfruit ice cream enjoys top billing on the dessert menu.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %938 18 12 54; www.turismevilafranca.com; Carrer Hermenegild Clascar 2; h3-6pm Mon, 9.30am-1.30pm & 3-6pm Tue-Sat, 10am-1pm Sun)
This information hub provides tips on visiting some of the smaller wineries in the area. Afternoon opening in summer is 4pm to 7pm.
8Getting There & Away
Rodalies trains run from Barcelona's Estació Sants to Vilafranca (€4.90, 55 minutes). By car, take the A2 north from Barcelona follow signs west at Martorell.
Tarragona
Pop 132,199
In this effervescent port city, Roman history collides with beaches, nightlife and a food scene that perfumes the air with freshly grilled seafood. The biggest lure is the wealth of ruins in Spain’s second most important Roman site, including mosaic-packed museums and a seaside amphitheatre. A roll-call of excellent places to eat gives you good reason to linger in the knot of lanes in the medieval centre, flanked by a broad cathedral with Gothic flourishes. Tarragona is also a gateway to the Costa Daurada’s sparkling beaches and the feast of Modernisme architecture in nearby Reus.
History
Tarragona was first occupied by the Romans, who called it Tarraco, in 218 BC; prior to that the area was first settled by Iberians, followed by Carthaginians. Scipio launched his successful military endeavours from here, and in 27 BC Augustus made it the capital of his new Tarraconensis province (roughly all modern Spain) and stayed until 25 BC, directing campaigns. During its Roman heyday Tarragona was home to over 200,000 people, and though abandoned when the Muslims arrived in AD 714, the city was reborn as the seat of a Christian archbishopric in the 11th century.
Sights
oCatedral de TarragonaCATHEDRAL
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.catedraldetarragona.com; Plaça de la Seu; adult/child €5/3; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat mid-Mar–Oct, 10am-5pm Mon-Fri, 10am-7pm Sat Nov–mid-Mar)
Sitting grandly atop town, Tarragona’s cathedral has both Romanesque and Gothic features, as typified by the main facade. The cloister has Gothic vaulting and Romanesque carved capitals, one of which shows rats conducting a cat’s funeral…until the cat comes back to life! It’s a lesson about passions seemingly lying dormant until they reveal themselves. Chambers off the cloister incorporate the Museu Diocesà, with its large collection extending from Roman hairpins to some lovely 12th- to 14th-century polychrome woodcarvings of a breastfeeding Virgin.
oMuseu Nacional Arqueològic de TarragonaMUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.mnat.cat; Plaça del Rei 5; adult/child €4.50/free; h9.30am-6pm Tue-Sat, to 8.30pm Jun-Sep, 10am-2pm Sun)
This excellent museum does justice to the cultural and material wealth of Roman Tarraco. The mosaic collection traces the changing trends – from simple black-and-white designs to complex full-colour creations; a highlight is the large, almost complete Mosaic de Peixos de la Pineda, showing fish and sea creatures. Explanation in the museum is in Catalan and Spanish, but there is a multilingual audio guide included in the price.
Museu d'Història de TarragonaRUINS
(MHT; www.museutgn.com; adult/child per site €3.30/free, all sites €11.05/free; hsites 9am-9pm Tue-Sat, 10am-3pm Sun Easter-Sep, 9am-7pm Tue-Sat, 9am-3pm Sun Oct-Easter)
The Museu d'Història de Tarragona consists of various separate Unesco World Heritage Roman sites, as well as some other historic buildings around town: Forùm Provincial Pretori i Circ Romans, Amfiteatre Romà, Passeig Arqueològic Muralles and Fòrum de la Colònia. Buy a combined ticket and get exploring.
Amfiteatre RomàRUINS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Parc de l'Anfiteatre; adult/child €3.30/free; h9am-9pm Tue-Sat, 10am-3pm Sun Easter-Sep, 10am-7pm Tue-Sat, 10am-3pm Sun Oct-Easter)
Near the beach is this well-preserved amphitheatre, where gladiators hacked away at each other, or wild animals. In its arena are the remains of 6th- and 12th-century churches built to commemorate the martyrdom of the Christian bishop Fructuosus and two deacons, believed to have been burnt alive here in AD 259. Much of the amphitheatre was picked to bits, the stone used to build the port, so what you see now is a partial reconstruction.
Passeig Arqueològic MurallesWALLS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; adult/child €3.30/free; hsites 9am-9pm Tue-Sat, 10am-3pm Sun Easter-Sep, 10am-7pm Tue-Sat, 10am-3pm Sun Oct-Easter)
A peaceful walk takes you around part of the perimeter of the old town between two lines of city walls. The inner ones are mainly Roman and date back to the 3rd century BC, while the outer ones were put up by the British in 1709 during the War of the Spanish Succession. The earliest stretches are a mighty 4m thick. Prepare to be awed by the vast gateways built by the Iberians and clamber up onto the battlements from the doorway to the right of the entrance for all-encompassing views of the city.
Aqüeducte de les FerreresBRIDGE
(Pont del Diable; GOOGLE MAP ; h9am-dusk)F
This aqueduct sits in a tangle of dusty pathways and glades 4km north of central Tarragona, just off the AP7 freeway (near where it intersects with the N240). It is a fine stretch of two-tiered aqueduct (217m long and 27m high), along which you can totter to the other side. Bus 5 to Sant Salvador from Plaça Imperial de Tàrraco, running every 10 to 20 minutes, will take you close, and you can walk back to the city along the river (about 90 minutes).
Museu i Necròpolis PaleocristiansRUINS
( GOOGLE MAP ; Avinguda de Ramón i Cajal 80; adult/child €4.50/free; h9.30am-1.30pm & 3-5.30pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
This vast Roman-Christian city of the dead on the western edge of town consists of over 2000 elaborate tombs. It was used from the 3rd century AD onwards, thus attesting to Rome’s conversion to Christianity. The museum features curious funereal objects and sarcophagi. Entry is free if you have already purchased a ticket to the Museu Nacional Arqueològic de Tarragona. It opens extended hours in high season.
PortAventuraAMUSEMENT PARK
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.portaventura.es; adult/child €45/39; h10am-7pm or 8pm, to midnight Jul & Aug; c)
A massive, blockbuster amusement park, PortAventura lies 7km west of Tarragona. Divided into themed sections, the park has plenty of exhilarating rides and numerous shows to keep all ages happy. The park complex boasts Shambhala, Europe's highest rollercoaster, as well as Costa Caribe Aquatic Park, a water world that includes some fear-inducing slides. There are various combined and multiday tickets available, and themed on-site accommodation that suits families with young kids.
zFestivals & Events
Festival de Santa TeclaSTREET CARNIVAL
(www.tarragonaturisme.cat/es/eventos/santa-tecla; Tarragona; hmid-Sep)
This colourful 10-day festival brings castells, or human 'castles', to the centre of Tarragona.Teams of castellers stand on each other’s shoulders to build towers up to nine levels high. A death-defying child scrambles to perch at the top before the whole structure gracefully disassembles itself. Watch the spectacle along Rambla Nova and stick around for the fireworks after sundown.
CATALONIA'S HUMAN CASTLES

Among the strangest spectacles in Catalonia are castells, or human ‘castles’. This sport originated in Valls, 20km north of Tarragona, in the 18th century and has since spread to other parts of the region. It involves teams of castellers standing on each other’s shoulders with a death-defying child scrambling up the side of the human tower to perch at the top before the whole structure gracefully disassembles itself; towers up to nine levels high are built. Don’t try this at home. For the most spectacular castells, pay a visit to Tarragona’s Festival de Santa Tecla in mid-September.
4Sleeping
Tarragona HostelHOSTEL€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %877 05 58 96; www.tarragonahostel.com; Carrer de la Unió; dm/d €12/30; W)
All the backpacker essentials are well-executed at this dead-centre hostel with chirpy staff. Choose from eight-bed dorms or a double room, and avail yourself of free wi-fi, a comfy common room, shared kitchen and laundry facilities (€4).
Hotel Plaça de la FontHOTEL€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %977 24 61 34; www.hotelpdelafont.com; Plaça de la Font 26; s/d €55/75; aW)
Comfortable modern rooms, decorated in individual styles with photos of Tarragona monuments, fill this cheerful hotel on popular Plaça de la Font. Rooms at the front are pretty well soundproofed from the sociable murmur below and have tiny balconies for people-watching. Breakfast is an extra €5.
Hotel Sant JordiHOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %977 20 75 15; www.hotelsantjordi.info; Avinguda Vía Augusta 185; s/d €68/79; paW)
The reception's decor screams 1970s, but this hotel, 2.5km northeast of central Tarragona by the appealing Savinosa beach, has spotless, comfortable rooms with balconies. The old world, caring atmosphere makes it far cosier than it appears at first glance. The hotel closes for a month in mid-November.
Hotel LauriaHOTEL€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %977 23 67 12; www.hotel-lauria.com; Rambla Nova 20; s/d incl breakfast €65/77; paWs)
Right on the Rambla Nova near where it ends at a balcony overlooking the sea, this smart hotel offers great-value modern rooms with welcome splashes of colour, large bathrooms and a small swimming pool. The rooms at the back are less exposed to the noise from the Rambla.
5Eating
AresCATALAN, SPANISH€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; http://aresrestaurant.com; Plaça del Forum; mains €10-12; h1-4pm & 8.30-11.30pm Wed-Sun)
Amid a riot of colourful, exuberant Modernista decor, the cordial welcome from this husband-and-wife team guarantees a good atmosphere for dining. Some classic Catalan dishes take their place alongside quality ingredients from across Spain: Asturian cheeses, Galician seafood, Burgos black pudding. Quality and quantity are both praiseworthy.
BarquetSEAFOOD€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %977 24 00 23; www.restaurantbarquet.com; Carrer del Gasometre 16; mains €11-18; h1-3.30pm & 9-10.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-3.30pm Mon)
This popular neighbourhood restaurant is a short downhill stroll from the centre. It's deservedly famous for its excellent rice dishes bursting with maritime flavour, and also has great raciones (large plates) of seafood. Don't be fooled by the nautical warehouse interior, fish dishes and jewel-like desserts are executed with finesse.
AQMEDITERRANEAN, FUSION€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %977 21 59 54; www.aq-restaurant.com; Carrer de les Coques 7; mains €11-20; h1.30-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm Tue-Sat)
The crisp interior design of this stone-walled restaurant promises fine dining, and AQ amply delivers. Its impeccably crafted fusion dishes – taking inspiration from Catalan, Italian and Asian cuisines – are playfully executed. Treat your tastebuds to Iberico pork burgers, squid carbonara or chop suey lobster. The three-course lunch menu (€19.80) is excellent value.
Arcs RestaurantCATALAN€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %977 21 80 40; www.restaurantarcs.com; Carrer de Misser Sitges 13; mains €18-22; h1-4pm & 8.30-11pm Tue-Sat)
Inside a medieval cavern decorated with bright contemporary art, feast on Mediterranean dishes that follow the seasons. Sample duck with a gin and tonic cream, salmon tataki with wasabi, or the always-excellent catch of the day. Leave room for desserts that please the eye as much as the tastebuds.
8Information
Tourist OfficeTOURIST INFORMATION
( GOOGLE MAP ; %977 25 07 95; www.tarragonaturisme.es; Carrer Major 39; h10am-2pm & 3-5pm Mon-Fri, to 7pm Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
Good place for booking guided tours of the city. Opens extended hours in high season.
8Getting There & Away
Eleven kilometres northwest from Tarragona, Reus airport is used by Ryanair, with flights to London, Dublin, Brussels and Frankfurt Hahn among others. Buses (usually timed for flights) run from Tarragona's bus station (20 minutes, €3) as well as from Barcelona (1¾ hours, €15).
The bus station ( GOOGLE MAP ; Plaça Imperial Tarraco) is 1.5km northwest of the old town along Rambla Nova. Destinations include Barcelona (€8.80, 1½ hours, up to 16 daily), Lleida (€5.25, 1¾ hours, three to five daily) and Valencia (€22, three to 4½ hours, six daily).
If checking train times online (www.renfe.com), be wary of two differently located stations in Tarragona. The local train station (Tarragona) is a 10-minute walk from the old town near the beach. There are departures to Barcelona (€8.05 to €20.80, one to 1½ hours, every 30 minutes) and Valencia (€15.20 to €31, two to 3½ hours, 19 daily).
A second out-of-town train station, Camp de Tarragona, lies 10km north of the centre (a 20-minute taxi ride away). There are frequent high-speed trains to Barcelona (€17.30 to €36.50, 35 minutes) and Lleida (€12 to €20, 30 minutes). Make use of hotel transfers if arriving here late at night, as taxis can be erratic.
WORTH A TRIP
GAUDÍ CENTRE

oGaudí CentreMUSEUM
(www.gaudicentre.cat; Plaça del Mercadal 3, Reus; adult/child €9/5; h10am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 11am-2pm Sun; c)
Reus, 14km west of Tarragona, is the birthplace of visionary architect Antoni Gaudí. Though none of Gaudí's buildings can be found in Reus, he was inspired by many of the historic structures in his home town. The superb Gaudí Centre gives a thorough introduction to the man and his global influence through engaging multilingual and audiovisual displays. The inspiration Gaudí found in nature, as well as his thoughtfulness and humility, are portrayed alongside touchable scale models of his designs.
Delta de L'Ebre
The Delta de l’Ebre, a 20km-long bulge of silt-formed land near Catalonia’s southern border, is laced by waterways that melt into the Balearic Sea. Flamingos and ibis strut in reed-fringed lagoons, dune-backed beaches are lashed by the wind, and marshes reflect sunsets like mirrors.
Seventy-eight square kilometres of this wild and exposed place is the Parc Natural Delta de l’Ebre, northern Spain’s most important waterbird habitat. Migration season (October and November) sees the bird population peak, but birds are also numerous in winter and spring. The park’s flat expanse of waterside trails is ideal for cyclists and ramblers. Exploring this remote and rural landscape, with its whitewashed farmhouses marooned among rice paddies and purple herons posing in ponds, lingers in the memory.
Scruffy, sprawling Deltebre is at the centre of the delta, but push on to smaller villages like Riumar, at the delta’s easternmost point, or Poblenou del Delta.
1Sights
EcomuseuMUSEUM
(Carrer de Dr Martí Buera 22, Deltebre; admission €2; h10am-2pm & 3-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
This engaging open-air museum shines a light on the delta’s ecosystems and traditional trades, such as fishing and rice cultivation. The garden’s wooden boardwalks weave past local flora, fishermen’s tools and even a llagut, an early 20th-century boat used to haul more than 350 sacks of rice at a time. There is also an aquarium offering a glimpse of the freshwater denizens of the delta. The museum opens shorter hours in low season.
4Sleeping
oMas del TancatCASA RURAL€
(%656 901014; masdeltancat@gmail.com; Camí dels Panissos; d/q €55/90; paW)
A converted historic farmhouse, Mas del Tancat has just five rooms with iron bedsteads, calming colour schemes and an ebullient welcome. Sitting by the waters of the delta, with farm animals wandering through the grounds, it is a tranquil escape and home-cooked dinners are available on request. Leave Amposta on the TV3405 towards Sant Jaume and turn right to Els Panissos just after the 3km sign.
oMasia TinetCASA RURAL€€
(%977.48 93 89; www.masiatinet.com; Barrio Lepanto 13, Deltebre; d incl breakfast €71.50; paWs)
Rooms at this cushy, family-run guesthouse are elegant but rustic, with bare brick walls, wooden beams and high ceilings. The lounge area has rocking chairs and a bar run on the honour system. There's a garden with deck chairs, so you can watch the sun set over marshlands speckled with birdlife, plus there's a small pool. Breakfasts are a banquet of homemade preserves and fresh produce, and service has a personal touch.
L'Algadir del DeltaHOTEL€€
(%977 74 45 59; www.hotelalgadirdelta.com; Ronda dels Pins 27-29, Poblenou del Delta; s/d incl breakfast €100/136; hFeb-Dec; paWs)
With great birdwatching on the hotel doorstep, this sleek, friendly, modern place in this tranquil village in the heart of the delta makes a top base. Rooms are contemporary, stylish and comfortable. There's a pleasant pool area and the hotel loans bikes to help you explore. The restaurant is also a worthy place to sample local cuisine.
5Eating
oMas PradesCATALAN€€
(%977 05 90 84; www.masdeprades.cat; Carretera T340, Km 8, Deltebre; mains €12-22; h1-3.30pm & 8-11pm Tue-Sun, weekends only Nov-Mar; W)
Gourmets come all the way down from Barcelona to this revamped country house to sample its superb delta cuisine. There is a range of lunch menus from three to five courses (€18 to €35), each of which makes a lip-smacking introduction to local delicacies like tender mussels roasted in garlic butter, baby squid, sizzling platters of rabbit and chicken, and the classic delta rice with wild duck.
Casa NuriSEAFOOD€€
(%977 48 01 28; www.restaurantnuri.com; Final Goles de Ebre, Riumar; mains €13-20; h10am-10pm Apr-Oct)
Locals fill this riverfront place, thanks to its reputation for superb local seafood like razor clams, rice glistening with squid ink, and just-caught sea bream. It's close to the booking office for Creuers Delta Ebre. Opens shorter hours in low season.
8Information
Centre d’InformacióTOURIST INFORMATION
(%977 48 96 79; www.turismedeltebre.com; Carrer de Dr Martí Buera 22, Deltebre; h10am-2pm & 3-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun)
The Centre d’Informació is housed in the same complex as the local eco-museum. Pick up maps of the region and brochures on cycle routes here.
8Getting There & Away
Weekday Hife (www.hife.es) buses head to the delta towns from Tarragona (€12.64, one to two hours, four daily) and Tortosa (€3.90, 30 minutes to one hour, up to 18 daily).
8Getting Around
If you don't reach the Delta de l'Ebre with your own wheels, consider renting a bike: the area sprawls and has extremely limited public transport.
WORTH A TRIP
CASTELL DE MIRAVET

Castell de MiravetCASTLE
(adult/child €3.50/2.30; h10am-5.30pm Tue-Sun, to 8pm summer)
Southern Catalonia's finest castle is at Miravet, 6km off the N420, 60km west of Tarragona. Built in the 11th century, it was reconquered then given to the Templars. It's a formidable stronghold, with incredibly solid walls, and it towers above the pretty village that cascades down a hill on the banks of the Ebro. Opening hours vary seasonally.
Tortosa
Pop 33,932
Arid Tortosa, 70km south of Tarragona and inland from the fertile Delta de l’Ebre, is experiencing a quiet tourism renaissance. It’s a sleepy town, for sure; but with a neck-straining castle, otherworldly sculpture garden and architectural gems spanning Gothic to Modernista styles, it’s carving a small niche for itself as a destination for cultural weekend breaks.
Tortosa was a battleground between medieval Christian and Muslim Spain. More recently, Tortosa was also on the front line between Nationalists and Republicans during the civil war and the site of an epic battle, which wrecked much of its medieval centre and cost over 35,000 lives. The town is also suffused with Jewish history that dates back to the 6th century; pick up a pamphlet in the tourist office to uncover Jewish Tortosa.
The town is a convenient base for day-trips to Miravet Castle or Gandesa’s Centre d'Estudis de la Batalla de l'Ebre.
1Sights
Jardins del PríncepPARK
(adult/child €3/2; h10am-1.30pm & 4.30-7.30pm Tue-Sat, 10am-1.30pm Sun)
In the grounds of a former 19th-century spa, this carefully manicured sculpture garden is a thought-provoking and uplifting place to explore. The statues purport to illustrate the motives and destiny of humankind (a rather broad artistic theme). Nevertheless, there are plenty of intriguing sculptures, among them an eye-popping tower of nude figures.
Museu de TortosaMUSEUM
(www.museudetortosa.cat; admission €3; h10am-1.30pm & 5-8.30pm Tue-Sat, 11am-1.30pm Sun)
Within a splendid blue Modernista building, decorated with gold trim and white checkerboard designs, lies this rather minimalist town museum. The 1908 building is worth ogling: formerly a city slaughterhouse, its design has delicate Moorish elements. Within, the museum does a great job of contextualising the area's history, from traces of early Iberian settlement through to the disorder and revolution from the 18th century onwards. From October to April, the museum operates afternoon hours of 4pm to 7pm.
Castell de la SudaCASTLE, RUIN
(h24hr)F
Wandering around this 10th-century fortress is murder on your footwear: trails seem to lead nowhere, and you have to contend with steep and unfinished stairways. Despite the access issues, the castle is an enjoyable ramble, especially for the lofty views over Tortosa. Near the entrance to the adjoining parador, you'll find a small Islamic cemetery.
Catedral de Santa MariaCATHEDRAL
(Carrer Portal del Palau; adult/child €3/2; h10am-1.30pm & 4.30-7pm Mon-Sat, 11am-2pm Sun)
This Gothic cathedral seizes attention with its many turrets and with gargoyles jutting from every eave.
4Sleeping & Eating
Parador de TortosaHISTORIC HOTEL€€
(%977 44 44 50; www.parador.es; Castell de le Suda; d from €95; paWs)
Tortosa's formidable fortress encloses a parador (historic state-run hotel), allowing you to repose in medieval surroundings overlooking vertiginous views of the town.
oXampu-XampanyTAPAS€€
(www.xampu-xampany.com; Avinguda Catalunya 41; mains €11-16; h9am-8pm Mon-Fri, 9am-midnight Sat)
This upmarket bar-restaurant on Tortosa's left bank stocks regional favourites, allowing you to snack on ham, sheep's cheese and tomato-slathered bread until late. Alternatively, fill up on the menu of well-presented Catalan classics, washed down with local wine.
8Information
Tourist InformationTOURIST INFORMATION
(%977 44 96 48; www.tortosaturisme.cat; Rambla Felip Pedrell 3; h10am-1.30pm & 4.30-7.30pm Tue-Sat, 10am-1.30pm Sun)
Get info, tips and the Tortosa Card at this tourist office next to the Museu de Tortosa.
8Getting There & Away
Trains reach Tortosa from Tarragona (€8.05, one to 1½ hours, three daily) and Valencia (€15.30, three hours, four daily). If visiting by car, find parking near the tourist office.



Hiking the Pyrenees

The Pyrenees aren’t Europe’s highest mountains, but they might just be their most formidable. The craggy behemoths stretch from the Bay of Biscay to the Mediterranean like a giant unbroken wall with barely a low-level pass to break them. Spectacular for many reasons, not least the abundance of powerful waterfalls, they act like a siren's call for hikers.
The GR11

Anyone who has spent any time hiking in the Spanish Pyrenees will likely be on first-name terms with Gran Recorrido 11 (GR11), the region’s most comprehensive long-distance footpath. It parallels the range in its entirety from Cap de Creus on the Costa Brava to Hondarribia on the Bay of Biscay. Measuring approximately 820km in length and with a cumulative elevation gain equivalent to five Mt Everests, most people sensibly elect to tackle the trail in short hops. Well-trammelled sections pass through the Valle de Ordesa near Torla and the Valle de Vallibierna close to Benasque.

Hiker on the Gran Recorrido 11 long-distance footpath | Henrique Feliciano Photography/Getty Images ©
Hiking Bases

The Spanish Pyrenees’ two national parks, Ordesa y Monte Perdido in Aragón and Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici in Catalonia have a particularly high concentration of good hiking trails, with accommodation available in refugios (mountain shelter, hut or refuge)or nearby villages. The former park is home to 3355m-high Monte Perdido, a tough ascent for well-equipped climbers, as well as easier hiking options such as the grunt up to the French frontier at Brecha de Rolando, or the popular Circo de Soaso, an attractive day-hike to an exuberant waterfall. If you’re super-fit, you can walk across Catalonia’s Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici in one day along the show-stopping 25km Espot–Boí (east-west traverse). You'll need several days to complete the 55km Carros de Foc (www.carrosdefoc.cat) that links all nine of the park’s refugios.
Other good hiking bases with places to stay and a nearby network of trails include the villages of Hecho and Torla in Aragon, or Taüll and Olot in Catalonia. The latter has good, family-friendly walking terrain.

Parque Nacional de Ordesa y Monte Perdido | Esslingerphoto.com/Getty Images ©
Practicalities

The optimum time for walking is mid-June to early September, though the more popular parks and paths can become crowded in midsummer. The weather can be unpredictable, so walkers should always be prepared for extreme conditions. However, since this is Europe (rather than Alaska), you’re never too far from a mountain village with basic shops, bars and accommodation.
Dotted throughout the mountains are refugios. Some are staffed and serve meals, while others provide shelter only. At holiday times staffed refugios are often full, so unless you've booked ahead, be prepared to camp. The Federación Aragonesa de Montañismo (www.fam.es) in Zaragoza can provide information, and a FAM card will get you substantial discounts on refugio stays. For information on refugios in Catalonia, try the Barcelona-based Federacio Enitats Excursionistes da Catalunya (www.feec.org). Editorial Alpina (www.editorialalpina.com) produce excellent maps for walkers. For a definitive guide to the GR11, check out the recently published Cicerone Guide The GR11 Trail – La Senda by Brian Johnson (2014).



Spain's Best Beaches


Fornells, Costa Brava | Mel Stuart/Getty Images ©

Cabo de Gata, Almería | Domingo Leiva/Getty Images ©
Spaniards argue for hours about which is their district's finest beach, so picking favourites from 5000km of coastline is a controversial, albeit mighty pleasurable, task. The Mediterranean's gentle strands and pretty coves contrast with the rougher beauty of the Atlantic coasts.
Illas Cíes A protected archipelago off Galicia, with beaches so stunning you'll gasp in disbelief. The finest, Praia das Rodas, is only accessible by boat.
Aiguablava/Fornells Neighbouring Costa Brava coves near Begur, so divine that we couldn't choose between them.
Cabo de Gata A series of stunning beaches, all distinct, on this memorable peninsula in Almería province.
Playa Torimbia Walking down to this sheltered fingernail-shaped cove laid out below you is an Asturian classic near Llanes. Clothing optional.
Playa del Silencio Backed by a natural rock amphitheatre, this Asturian jewel between Cudillero and Luarca is hard to beat.
Playa de la Concha A scallop-shaped stretch of sand in the heart of San Sebastián, and possibly Europe's finest city beach.
Bolonia A stretch of pristine sand, the finest of Andalucía's unspoiled Costa de la Luz. Nearby Zahara de los Atunes and Playa de los Lances are spectacular, too.
Playa de los Eucaliptos Wild, long and windy, this spot near Amposta in Catalonia's Delta de l’Ebre is perfect for beachcombers, kiteboarding and wakeboarding.
Playa As Catedrais The unearthly rock formations at this Galician strand near Ribadeo are such a drawcard that daily numbers are limited.




=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================


========NEW



Barcelona
From Gothic to Gaudí, Barcelona bursts with art and architecture. It’s also home to celebrated Catalan restaurants, fascinating neighbourhoods and simmering nightlife. Cap it off with pretty beaches, hilltop viewpoints and historical relics dating back to the Romans, and it’s no wonder Barcelona continues to be one of Europe’s best-loved destinations.
Getting Around
Heavy traffic and narrow one-way streets can exasperate even the most diehard city drivers. Luckily Barcelona has a good metro system with stops all across town. A one-way fare costs €2.15, a day pass costs €7.60.
Parking
Street parking can be hard to find. Try a car park (such as those near Plaça de les Glòries or Estació del Nord). Parking costs around €3 per hour or €17 to €20 for 24 hours.
Discover the Taste of Barcelona
For fresh seafood, visit the family-run eateries in La Barceloneta near the seaside. Poble Sec and Sant Antoni have some great local favourites, particularly for tapas.
Live Like a Local


TOP EXPERIENCES
A Panoramic views in Park Güell
The playfulness of Gaudí’s imagination runs wild in this hilltop park, which is part garden and part Modernista sculptural fantasy.
A Bar-hopping in El Born
Join locals on an evening of bar-hopping and tapas nibbling in one of Barcelona’s best-loved neighbourhoods, El Born, whose tangle of streets surround the Basilica de Santa Maria del Mar.
A Brilliant artwork at Fundació Joan Miró
There is no finer or more comprehensive collection of Joan Miró’s work than this museum on Montjuïc. One of Barcelona’s favourite sons, Miró was a towering figure of 20th-century Catalan art.





ARTISTIC INSPIRATION ON THE COSTA BRAVA


This seaside stunner takes you to some of Spain’s prettiest beaches, with unspoilt coves, flower-trimmed villages and sweeping panoramas lurking around nearly every bend in the road.
TRIP HIGHLIGHTS

2–4 DAYS
160 KM / 99 MILES
GREAT FOR…
  
BEST TIME TO GO
May or September for beach weather with fewer crowds.
 ESSENTIAL PHOTO
The weird and wonderful Teatre-Museu Dalí in Figueres.
 BEST FOR FAMILIES
Playing in the sand on pretty Llafranc beach.
 
Tossa de Mar
Take a boat out to glide over the bay’s crystal-clear waters
SHAUN EGAN / GETTY IMAGES ©
Artistic Inspiration on the Costa Brava

Just north of Barcelona, the Costa Brava has long captivated visitors with its beautiful bays, dramatic headlands and quaint, cobblestone villages just inland from the surf. Great views aside, there’s much to do in this picturesque corner of Catalonia: you can visit ancient Roman ruins, clamber around medieval castles, go eye-to-eye with marbled rays off the Iles Mendes, and wander wide-eyed through fantastical Salvador Dalí creations.

TOP OF CHAPTER
TRIP HIGHLIGHT
1 Tossa de Mar
Curving around a boat-speckled bay and guarded by a headland crowned with impressive defensive medieval walls and towers, Tossa de Mar is a picturesque village of crooked, narrow streets onto which tourism has tacked a larger, modern extension.
The deep-ochre, fairy-tale walls and towers on the pine-dotted headland, Mont Guardí, at the end of the main beach, were built between the 12th and 14th centuries. The area they girdle is known as the Vila Vella – or Old Town – full of steep little cobbled streets and picturesque whitewashed houses, garlanded with flowers.
5 Click here
The Drive » A snaking road hugs the spectacular ups and downs of the Costa Brava for the 23km from Tossa de Mar to Sant Feliu de Guíxols with – allegedly – a curve for each day of the year. From Tossa de Mar take Carretera Blanes a Sant Feliu and stick to the shoreline.

A flying leap over Tossa de Mar waters
EKATERINA ABRAMOVA / EYEEM / GETTY IMAGES ©
TOP OF CHAPTER
2 Sant Feliu de Guíxols
Sant Feliu has an attractive waterside promenade and a handful of curious leftovers from its long past, the most important being the so-called Porta Ferrada (Iron Gate): a wall and entrance, which is all that remains of a 10th-century monastery. The gate lends its name to an annual music festival held here every July since 1962.
Just north along the coast is S’agaró, with each of its Modernista houses designed by Gaudí disciple Rafael Masó. Leave your wheels behind and take the Camí de Ronda to Platja Sa Conca – one of the most attractive beaches in the area.
The Drive » Take the Carretera de Palamós (located just a few blocks north of the marina) east. After 1.5km take the Carretera Castelo d’Aro and follow this north onto C31. After 17km on C31, take exit 331. Continue through the historic village of Mont-Ras, skirting the southern edge of bigger Palafrugell. Then take Av del Mar into Calella de Palafrugell. It takes about a half-hour to make the 28km drive.
TOP OF CHAPTER
3 Calella de Palafrugell
Halfway up the coast from Barcelona to the French border begins one of the most beautiful stretches of the Costa Brava. Start off in Calella, the southernmost of Palafrugell’s crown jewels. The settlement is strung Aegean-style around a bay of rocky points and small, pretty beaches, with a few fishing boats still hauled up on the sand. The seafront is lined with year-round restaurants serving the fruits of the sea. Atop Cap Roig, 2.5km from the centre, the Jardí Botànic (adult/child €6/3; 10am-8pm Apr-Sep, to 6pm Oct-Mar, closed Mon-Fri Jan & Feb) is a beautiful garden of 500 Mediterranean species, set around an early-20th-century castle-palace.
5 Click here
The Drive » The next stop is barely 2km northeast of Calella. If you need to stretch your legs, you can also walk to Llafranc along coastal footpaths. Driving, take Av Joan Pericot i García east. Go straight through the roundabout at Plaça Doctor Trueta, then veer to the right on Carrer de Lluís Marquès Carbó.
 DETOUR:
CASTELL DE PÚBOL

Start: 3 Calella de Palafrugell
Northwest of Palafrugell, the Castell de Púbol (www.salvador-dali.org; Plaça de Gala Dalí; adult/concession €8/6; 10am-6pm Tue-Sun mid-Mar–early Jan) forms the southernmost point of the ‘Salvador Dalí triangle’, other elements of which include the Teatre-Museu Dalí in Figueres and his home in Portlligat.
Having promised to make his wife Gala, his muse and the love of his life, ‘queen of the castle’, in 1969 Dalí finally found the ideal residence to turn into Gala’s refuge, since at the age of 76 she no longer desired Dalí’s hectic lifestyle – a semi-dilapidated Gothic and Renaissance stronghold which included a 14th-century church in the quiet village of Púbol.
The sombre castle, its stone walls covered with creepers, is almost the antithesis to the flamboyance of the Teatre-Museu Dalí or Dalí’s seaside home: Gala had it decorated exactly as she wished and received only whom she wished. Legend has it that Dalí himself had to apply for written permission to visit her here.
The interior reflects her tastes, though Dalí touches creep in here and there. In the dining room is a replica of Cua d’oreneta i violoncels (Swallow’s Tail and Cellos) – his last painting, completed here in 1983 during the two years of mourning following Gala’s death.
The Castell is 2km from the village of La Pera, just south of the C66 and 22km northwest of Palafrugell.
 LINK YOUR TRIP

16 Central Catalan’s Wineries & Monasteries
After ending in Figueres, travel 44km south to Girona to the start of this scenic drive around Catalonia’s interior.
18 The Pyrenees
From Figueres it’s just 25km east to Besalú, where you can drive the Pyrenees trip in reverse, traveling across the mountains to San Sebastián.
TOP OF CHAPTER
TRIP HIGHLIGHT
4 Llafranc
Llafranc has a smaller bay but a longer, handsome stretch of sand, cupped on either side by pine-dotted craggy coastline. Above the east side of town, the Cap de Sant Sebastià is a magical spot that offers fabulous views in both directions and out to sea. There’s a lighthouse here, as well as a defensive tower and chapel now incorporated into a hotel. There’s also the ruins of a pre-Roman Iberian settlement with multilingual explanatory panels. It’s a 40-minute walk up: follow the steps from the harbour and the road up to the right.
The Drive » From Llafranc, head north along GIV6541 towards Palafrugell. Take GIP6531 and follow the signs down to Tamariu; you’ll pass through piney forest on the way. Again, if you’d prefer to walk, it’s a magnificent 4km walk along the coast.
TOP OF CHAPTER
5 Tamariu
Tamariu is a fabulous, small, crescent-shaped cove redolent with the scent of pine. Its beach has some of the most translucent waters on Spain’s Mediterranean coast. The gently sloping sands and shallow waters are a great place for small children to play.
The Drive » It’s 6km or so to Begur. Take Carrer Aigublava north on a scenic uphill journey, then turn right on GIP6531 and follow this to Begur.
TOP OF CHAPTER
6 Begur
Attractive little Begur is dotted with tempting restaurants and cafes and topped by a 10th-century castell (castle), towering above the hill village. The sublime coastline around Begur, with its pocket-sized coves hemmed in by pine trees and subtropical flowers and lapped by azure water, is magical.
4 Click here
The Drive » Head west out of Begur along GI653. In Regencós, take C31, then a few kilometres north of Pals, turn left onto GI651. Drive time to Peratallada is about 20 minutes.
TOP OF CHAPTER
7 Peratallada
One of Catalonia’s most gorgeous villages, Peratallada is blessed with beautifully preserved narrow lanes, heavy stone arches, a 12th-century Romanesque church and an 11th-century castle-mansion (now a luxury hotel and restaurant). It’s a characterful spot, particularly at night.
The Drive » Get back on GI651 and retrace the drive to C31. But this time turn north onto C31 and continue for 6km. You’ll cross the attractive medieval town of Torroella de Montgrí, then continue on Carretera de L’Estartit. At the roundabout continue straight, along GI641. The 18km drive takes about 25 minutes.
THE COSTA BRAVA WAY

The 255km-long stretch of cliffs, coves, rocky promontories and pine groves that make up the signposted Costa Brava Way, stretching from Blanes to Colliure in France, unsurprisingly offers some of the best walks in Catalonia, ranging from gentle rambles to high-octane scrambles (or one long, demanding hike if you want to do the whole thing).
For the most part, the trail follows the established GR92, but also includes a number of coastal deviations. A choice route is Cadaqués to the Cap de Creus Lighthouse (2½ hours), a relatively easy walk from the centre of Cadaqués that passes Portlligat before continuing along windswept, scrub-covered, rocky ground past several isolated beaches and reaching the lighthouse.

A misty sunrise over the Cost Brava
XOSE CASAL PHOTOGRAPHY / GETTY IMAGES ©
TOP OF CHAPTER
TRIP HIGHLIGHT
8 L’Estartit
L’Estartit has a long, wide beach of fine sand but it’s the diving that stands out. The protected Illes Medes, a spectacular group of rocky islets barely 1km offshore, are home to some of the most abundant marine life on Spain’s Mediterranean coast. Eateries serving mostly fresh seafood as well as standard Spanish fare are plentiful along the seafront.
The Drive » Retrace the drive back through Torroella de Montgrí, then continue onto C31 northwest (don’t cross back over the bridge). After about 3km turn right onto GI632, which leads straight into town (depositing you at the town hall if you so wish). The 19km drive takes about 22 minutes.
TOP OF CHAPTER
9 L’Escala
Travel back millennia to the ancient Greco-Roman site of Empúries (www.mac.cat; adult/child €5/free; 10am-8pm Jun-Sep, to 5pm Oct-May, closed Mon Nov-Feb), set behind a near-virgin beach facing the Mediterranean. Its modern descendant, L’Escala, 11km north of Torroella de Montgrí, is a sunny and pleasant medium-sized resort on the often-windswept southern shore of the Golf de Roses.
The Empúries is a picturesque two-part site that was an important Greek, and later Roman, trading port, though the site was originally used by Phoenicians. There are fine pieces – including mosaics – in the museum here, which gives good background information. Empúries is 2km northwest of the L’Escala town centre along the coast.
5 Click here
The Drive » Start this 25-minute drive by taking Carretera Sant Martí d’Empúries to Sant Pere Pescador. After crossing a small river, look for GIV6216 leading north. From here, it’s a straight shot 8km or so to Castelló d’Empúries.
WHY THIS IS A CLASSIC TRIP
REGIS ST LOUIS, AUTHOR


As a lifelong admirer of the strange and captivating works of Salvador Dalí, I’ve always felt a deep affinity for the wild coastal scenery around Cadaqués where Dalí spent his formative (and later) years. Yet the whole Costa Brava easily passes for artistic inspiration, with its serene bays, rugged headlands and golden beaches. This coastal drive is pure magic.
TOP OF CHAPTER
a Castelló d’Empúries
This well-preserved ancient town was once the capital of Empúries, a medieval Catalan county that maintained a large degree of independence up to the 14th century. Today it makes a superb base for birdwatching at the nearby Parc Natural dels Aiguamolls de l’Empordà (www.parcsdecatalunya.net; parking €2; El Cortalet information centre 9.30am-2pm & 3.30-7pm), as well as at a number of wind-blown but peaceful beaches. The park lies 4km to the northeast along Carretera Castelló d’Empúries. Away from the feathered treats of the natural park, architectural beauty can be found in the town centre’s Església de Santa Maria on Plaça de Jacint Verdaguer. It’s a voluminous 13th- and 14th-century Gothic church with a sturdy Romanesque bell tower.
4 Click here
The Drive » It’s 23km to Cadaqués – a 30-minute trip, though you could take much longer, with stops to admire the view on this stunning drive. From Castelló d’Empúries, take Carrer Santa Clara to C260. Pass through La Garriga and get on GI614, which will take you the rest of the way. As you ascend, the scenery gets stunning.
TOP OF CHAPTER
b Cadaqués
A whitewashed village around a rocky bay, Cadaqués’ narrow, hilly streets are perfect for wandering. The iconic town and its surrounding area have a special magic – a fusion of wind, sea, light and rock – that isn’t dissipated even by the throngs of summer visitors.
A portion of that magic owes itself to Salvador Dalí, who spent family holidays here during his youth, and lived much of his later life at nearby Portlligat. At the Museu de Cadaqués (Carrer de Narcís Monturiol 15; adult/child €4/3; 10.30am-1.30pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat Apr-Jun & Oct, 10am-8pm daily Jul-Sep), Dalí often features strongly in the temporary exhibitions on display, as do his contemporaries, also connected to Cadaqués, such as Picasso.
5 Click here
The Drive » Backtrack to Castelló d’Empúries. Stay on C260 as it skirts the southern edge of town, and follow it all the way to Figueres. Total drive time is about 45 minutes for the 35km drive.
TOP OF CHAPTER
TRIP HIGHLIGHT
c Figueres
Twelve kilometres inland, Figueres is a busy town with a French feel and an unmissable attraction: Salvador Dalí. The artist was born in Figueres in 1904 and although his career took him to Madrid, Barcelona, Paris and the USA, he remained true to his roots. In the 1960s and ’70s he created here the extraordinary Teatre-Museu Dalí (www.salvador-dali.org; Plaça de Gala i Salvador Dalí 5; admission incl Dalí Joies & Museu de l’Empordà adult/child under 9yr €12/free; 9am-8pm Jul-Sep, 9.30am-6pm Tue-Sun Mar-Jun & Oct, 10.30am-6pm Tue-Sun Nov-Feb) – a monument to surrealism and a legacy that outshines any other Spanish artist, both in terms of popularity and sheer flamboyance.
This red castlelike building, topped with giant eggs and studded with plaster-covered croissants, is an entirely appropriate final resting place for the master of surrealism. ‘Theatre-museum’ is an apt label for this trip through the incredibly fertile imagination of one of the great performers of the 20th century. The inside is full of surprises, tricks and illusions, and contains a substantial portion of Dalí’s life’s work.

Figueres streetscape
MICHAEL BARAM / ALAMY ©
EATING & SLEEPING

Tossa de Mar 1
5 La Cuina de Can Simon CATALAN €€€
(972 34 12 69; www.lacuinadecansimon.com; Carrer del Portal 24; mains €22-35, taster menus €68-98; 1-3.30pm & 8-10.30pm Wed-Sat, 1-3.30pm Sun) Tossa’s culinary star nestles by the old walls in a former fisherman’s stone house and distinguishes itself by serving the most imaginative creations in town. Taking the mar i muntanya (sea and mountains) theme to its logical extreme, it presents stunning combinations of fresh seafood and succulent meat. Even if you’re not splurging on the gob-stoppingly good taster menu, stop by for the delicious desserts. Opens daily in summer.
Calella de Palafrugell 3
5 La Croissanteria de Calella ICE CREAM €
(www.lacroissanteriadecalella.com; Carrer Chopitea 3-5; ice cream €2.50; 10am-5pm; ) The main reason for stopping by here is the truly exceptional Sandro Desii ice cream (www.sandrodesii.com). The pistachio, canela con café (cinnamon with coffee), or even the humble vanilla will leave you in raptures.
Begur 6
4 Hotel Classic HOTEL €€
(656 906995; www.hotelclassicbegur.com; Carrer de Pi i Ralló 3; d €120-145; ) In the heart of the old town, this warmly welcoming year-round spot has beautiful rooms themed on various notable dates in Begur’s history. All are spacious and comfortable, with top modern bathrooms. There are endearing details throughout – we liked the fairly priced in-room wine selection. There’s a good restaurant – breakfast is praiseworthy – and a downstairs spa zone. A bargain in the low season.
L’Escala 9
5 La Gruta FUSION €€
(972 77 62 11; www.restaurantlagruta.com; Carrer del Pintor Enric Serra 15; 3-course menu €27; 12.30-3.30pm Mon, 12.30-3.30pm & 8-10.30pm Tue-Sat) This innovative place with slick service is definitely one of the most interesting places to eat in town: as well as catch-of-the-day, it sources top-grade beef fillets and does some inventive fusion and pasta dishes; the desserts are delightful.
Castelló d’Empúries a
4 Hotel Casa Clara HOTEL €€
(972 25 02 15; www.hotelcasaclara.com; Carrer de la Fruita 27; s/d €65/90; ) The spacious, tiled rooms at this adorable little hotel all feature plenty of natural light, an individual colour scheme and very comfortable beds – some with wrought-iron bedsteads. The attached restaurant features a changing weekly menu of imaginative, beautifully executed dishes, such as courgette-and-hazelnut bake and sea bream with shitake mushrooms (three courses €15).
Cadaqués b
5 Es Baluard SEAFOOD €€
(972 25 81 83; www.esbaluard-cadaques.net; Riba Nemesi Llorens; mains €16-22; 1-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm) The family that runs this old-school restaurant that’s set into the old sea wall clearly worships at the throne of Poseidon, because the tastiest of his subjects wind up on your plate. Fish dishes drawing on local market produce, such as the anchoas de Cadaqués (anchovies from Cadaqués) and gambitas de Roses (prawns from Roses), dominate the menu and you shouldn’t shy away from the crema catalana (crème-brûlée-like custard desserts), either.







CENTRAL CATALAN’S WINERIES & MONASTERIES


On this dramatic drive into Catalonia’s hinterland, you’ll see age-old mountain monasteries, wander through medieval quarters and take in picturesque, sun-dappled vineyards.
TRIP HIGHLIGHTS

2–4 DAYS
380 KM / 236 MILES
GREAT FOR…
 
BEST TIME TO GO
Any time, but March to November for warmer days.
 ESSENTIAL PHOTO
Montserrat against its dramatic mountainous backdrop.
 BEST FOR HISTORY
Strolling the medieval Jewish quarter in Girona.
 
Montserrat
The Monestir de Montserrat – one of Catalonia’s most important shrines
MAXIMILIAN MÜLLER / GETTY IMAGES ©
Central Catalan’s Wineries & Monasteries

You’ll experience many of Catalonia’s lesser-known charms on this memorable inland drive. The medieval town of Girona is crammed with historic sites, while a wander along Vic’s cobblestone streets reveals architectural treasures. You’ll find a photogenic castle in Cardona and atmospheric monasteries along the Cistercian route. The trip ends at the quaint village of Vilafranca del Penedès, in the heart of magnificent wine country.

TOP OF CHAPTER
TRIP HIGHLIGHT
1 Girona
Northern Catalonia’s largest city, Girona is a tight huddle of ancient arcaded houses, grand churches and climbing cobbled streets. It’s home to Catalonia’s most extensive and best-preserved medieval Jewish quarter, all enclosed by defensive walls, with the lazy Río Onyar meandering along the edge of town. The excellent Museu d’Història dels Jueus de Girona (www.girona.cat/call; Carrer de la Força 8; adult/child €4/free; 10am-8pm Mon-Sat, to 2pm Sun) shows genuine pride in Girona’s Jewish heritage. Nearby, the stunning 800-year-old Catedral (www.catedraldegirona.org; Plaça de la Catedral; adult/student incl Basílica de Sant Feliu €7/5, Sun free; 10am-7.30pm Apr-Oct, 10am-6.30pm Nov-Mar) provides a window into medieval Christendom.
54 Click here
The Drive » From Girona, it’s about one hour (70km) to Vic. From Girona, take Carrer del Carme east out of town. At the roundabout (2.7km further), turn onto GIV6703. Merge onto the N11. Take exit 702 onto the C25. Follow this 50km through lush mountainous scenery, before taking exit 187 onto N141, which takes you into Vic.

Girona
Colourful buildings line the banks of the Río Onyar
MICHAL KRAKOWIAK / GETTY IMAGES ©
  LINK YOUR TRIP

19 Barcelona to Valencia
After finishing this trip, head 56km west to Lleida for historic villages and outdoor adventures.
20 Mediterranean Meander
From the last monastery, drive 64km south on C14 to Tarragona for a highlight-filled drive along Spain’s south coast.
TOP OF CHAPTER
2 Vic
Vic is one of Catalonia’s gems. Its enchanting old quarter is crammed with Roman remnants, medieval leftovers, a grand Gothic cloister, an excellent art museum, some hectic markets and a glut of superb restaurants.
Plaça Major, the largest of Catalonia’s central squares, is lined with medieval, baroque and Modernista mansions. It’s still the site of the huge twice-weekly market (Tuesday and Saturday mornings). Around it swirl the narrow serpentine streets of medieval Vic, lined by mansions, churches, chapels, a Roman temple and a welcoming atmosphere.
The Museu Episcopal (www.museuepiscopalvic.com; Plaça del Bisbe Oliba 3; adult/child over 10yr €7/3.50; 10am-1pm & 3-6pm Tue-Fri, 10am-7pm Sat, 10am-2pm Sun) holds a marvellous collection of Romanesque and Gothic art, including works by key figures such as Lluís Borrassà and Jaume Huguet.
54 Click here
The Drive » From Vic, take a northern, slightly longer, route to Cardona for stunning mountain scenery. Take C25 west from town. After about 6km, take exit 170 onto C651, then take C62, which merges onto C154. Around La Plana, take E9 north, then take the C26 southwest. Stay on this until the B420, and follow signs to Cardona.
TOP OF CHAPTER
3 Cardona
Long before arrival, you spy in the distance the outline of the impregnable 18th-century fortress high above Cardona, which itself lies next to the Muntanya de Sal (Salt Mountain). The castle – follow the signs uphill to the Parador Ducs de Cardona, a lovely place to stay overnight – was built over an older predecessor. The single-most remarkable element of the buildings is the lofty and spare Romanesque Església de Sant Vicenç.
The Drive » It’s a one-hour drive south to Montserrat. The scenic route along C55 passes over forested slopes and around the old village of Manresa (a pilgrimage site). About 20km south of there, take BP1121 and follow the signs to Centre Urbà/Montserrat.
TOP OF CHAPTER
TRIP HIGHLIGHT
4 Montserrat
Montserrat is a spectacular 1236m-high mountain of strangely rounded rock pillars, shaped by wind, rain and frost. With the historic Benedictine Monestir de Montserrat, this is one of Catalonia’s most important shrines. Its caves and many mountain paths offer spectacular rambles, reachable by funiculars.
You can explore the mountain above the monastery on a web of paths leading to some of the peaks and to 13 empty hermitages. The Funicular de Sant Joan (one way/return €2.40/3.70; every 20min 10am-6.50pm, closed mid-late Jan) will carry you up the first 250m from the monastery. To see the chapel on the spot where the holy image of the Virgin was discovered, you can drop down the Funicular de Santa Cova (one way/return €2.20/3.50; every 20min, closed mid-Jan–Feb), or else it’s an easy walk down, followed by a stroll along a precipitous mountain path with fabulous views.
4 Click here
The Drive » The drive from the monastery offers magnificent views from clifftop heights, particularly along BP1103, which merges onto B110. A few kilometres further, take the ramp onto A2 and stay on it for 9km. Take exit 559 toward Vilafranca del Penedès, then take C15 south, and BP2151 into Sant Sadurní d’Anoia.
TOP OF CHAPTER
5 Sant Sadurní d’Anoia
Some of Spain’s finest wines come from the Penedès plains southwest of Barcelona. Sant Sadurní d’Anoia, located about a half-hour west of Barcelona, is the capital of cava, a sparkling, champagne-style wine popular worldwide, and drunk in quantity in Spain over Christmas.
The headquarters of Codorníu (93 891 33 42; www.codorniu.es; Avinguda de Jaume Codorníu; adult/child €9/6; 9am-5pm Mon-Fri, to 1pm Sat & Sun) are in a beautiful Modernista cellar at the entry to Sant Sadurní d’Anoia. Next to the Sant Sadurní train station, Freixenet (93 891 70 96; www.freixenet.com; Carrer de Joan Sala 2; adult/child 9-17yr €7/4.20; 1½hr tours 10am-1pm & 3-4.30pm Mon-Thu, 10am-1pm Fri-Sun) is the biggest cava-producing company in Penedès. Visits include a tour of its 1920s cellar, a spin on the tourist train around the property and samples of its cava.
The Drive » It’s a speedy 15km drive to the next stop. To avoid the AP7 toll road, take the Rambla de la Generalitat southwest and follow it onto C243a. Stay on this all the way to Vilafranca del Penedès.
TOP OF CHAPTER
TRIP HIGHLIGHT
6 Vilafranca del Penedès
Vilafranca del Penedès is an attractive historical town and the heart of the Penedès Denominación de Origen (DO; Denomination of Origin) region, which produces noteworthy light white wines and some very tasty reds.
Vilafranca has appealing narrow streets lined with medieval mansions. The mainly Gothic Basilica de Santa Maria (Plaça de Jaume I) stands at the heart of the old town. The basilica faces the Museu de les Cultures del Vi de Catalunya (www.vinseum.cat; Plaça de Jaume I 5; adult/child €7/4; 10am-2pm & 4-7pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun) across Plaça de Jaume I. Housed in a fine Gothic building, a combination of museums here covers local archaeology, art, geology and bird life, and has an excellent section on wine.
5 Click here
The Drive » Leave town via Avinguda de Tarragona. Follow this onto the AP7. Take the E90/AP2 exit toward Lleida. After 17km on this road, take exit 11 and get onto TP2002, which leads up to Santes Creus. All told it’s about a 45-minute drive.
 DETOUR:
TORRES

Start: 6 Vilafranca del Penedès
Just 2km northwest of Vilafranca del Penedès on the BP2121, Torres (93 817 74 87; www.torres.es; vineyard tour adult/child €6.70/4.70; 9am-5pm Mon-Sat, to 1pm Sun & holidays) is the area’s premier winery, with a family winemaking tradition dating from the 17th century. It revolutionised Spanish winemaking in the 1960s by introducing temperature-controlled, stainless-steel technology and French grape varieties. Torres produces an array of reds and whites of all qualities, using many grape varieties.

Torres
The area’s premier winery
SIQUI SANCHEZ / GETTY IMAGES ©
TOP OF CHAPTER
7 Reial Monestir de Santes Creus
Cistercian monks settled here in 1168 and from then on this monastery (Plaça de Jaume el Just, Santes Creus; adult/senior & student €4.50/free; 10am-6.30pm Jun-Sep, 10am-5pm Oct-May) developed as a major centre of learning and a launch pad for the repopulation of the surrounding territory. Behind the Romanesque and Gothic facade lies a glorious 14th-century sandstone cloister, austere chapter house, cavernous dormitory and royal apartments where the count-kings often stayed when they popped by during Holy Week.
The Drive » Take TP2002 south and turn onto C51 about 7km south of Santa Creus. Stay on C51 for a few kilometres before taking N240. Fine views await as you cross the Tossal Gros mountain, part of Catalonia’s precoastal range. Exit onto TV7001 toward L’Espluga de Francolí. You’ll pass through this small town along T700 en route to the monastery.
TOP OF CHAPTER
8 Reial Monestir de Santa Maria de Poblet
A Unesco World Heritage site, the fortified Reial Monestir de Santa Maria de Poblet (www.poblet.cat; Vimbodí-Poblet; adult/student €7/4; 10am-12.45pm & 3-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-12.30pm & 3-5.30pm Sun) was founded in 1151. It became Catalonia’s most powerful monastery and the burial place of many of its rulers. Poblet was sacked in 1835 by marauding peasants as payback for the monks’ abuse of their feudal powers, which included imprisonment and torture. High points include the mostly Gothic main cloister and the alabaster sculptural treasures of the Panteón de los Reyes (Kings’ Pantheon). The raised alabaster sarcophagi contain eight Catalan kings, such greats as Jaume I (the conqueror of Mallorca and Valencia) and Pere III.
The Drive » The last stop is another 30km north. You’ll take the T700 back through L’Espluga de Francolí, then hop onto the T232. You’ll take the L220 as you reach Els Omells de na Gaia. Follow this north, about another 1km, then look for the signed right turn leading to Vallbona de les Monges.
TOP OF CHAPTER
9 Reial Monestir de Santa Maria de Vallbona de les Monges
The Reial Monestir de Santa Maria de Vallbona de les Monges (973 33 02 66; Carrer Major, Vallbona de les Monges; adult/child €4/1; 10.30am-1.30pm & 4.30-6.45pm Tue-Sat, noon-1.30pm & 4.30-6.45pm Sun Mar-Oct, closes 5.30pm rest of year) was founded in the 12th century and is where a dozen monges (nuns) still live and pray. The monastery has undergone years of restoration, which has finally cleared up most of the remaining scars of civil war damage.
EATING & SLEEPING

Girona 1
5 Txalaka BASQUE €€
(972 22 59 75; www.restaurant-txalaka.com; Carrer Bonastruc de Porta 4; mains €12-20, pintxos €2.50-4; 1-4pm & 7.30-11.30pm; ) For sensational Basque cooking and pintxos (tapas) washed down with txakoli (the fizzy white wine from the Basque coast) poured from a great height, don’t miss this popular local spot. Just load up your plate with bar-top snacks, make sure to order some hot ones from the kitchen too and pay according to the number of montadito (bread) sticks/dishes.
5 Nu CATALAN €€
(972 22 52 30; www.nurestaurant.cat; Carrer d’Abeuradors 4; mains €16-18, degustation menu €50; 1.15-3.45pm & 8.15-10.45pm Tue-Sat, 1.15-3.45pm Mon; ) Sleek and confident, this handsome contemporary old-town spot has innovative, top-notch plates prepared in view by the friendly team. There are always some very interesting flavour combinations, and they work. Great value for this quality.
4 Bells Oficis B&B €€
(972 22 81 70; www.bellsoficis.com; Carrer dels Germans Busquets 2; r incl breakfast €55-85; ) A lovingly restored, 19th-century flat just by the Rambla in the heart of Girona makes a stylish and ultrawelcoming place to stop. Period details combine with modern styling most effectively: the whole package is immaculate. There are just five beautiful, light rooms: some share bathrooms – those with en suite have no bathroom door – while the largest (€105) has ample room for four people.
Vic 2
5 El Jardinet CATALAN €€
(938 86 28 77; www.eljardinetdevic.com; Carrer de Corretgers 8; menus €19-27, mains €18-23; 1-3.30pm daily, 8.30-11pm Fri & Sat; ) An exceedingly good choice, whose fairly spare interior is enlivened by really warm-hearted service and beautifully prepared traditional dishes, presented with panache. It’s the sort of place you’ll head back to tomorrow, too.
4 Estació del Nord HOTEL €
(935 16 62 92; www.estaciodelnord.com; Plaça de l’Estació 4; s/d €48/61; ) The 14 refurbished rooms of this smart little hotel, well located on the 1st floor of the 1910 train station, are decked out in soothing creams and whites and overseen by a friendly family. It’s well soundproofed from the trains and busy road.
Montserrat 4
4 Hotel Abat Cisneros HOTEL €€
(938 77 77 01; www.montserratvisita.com; s/d €63/108; ) The only hotel in the monastery complex has a super location next to the basilica, and tasteful, spacious rooms, some of which look over Plaça de Santa Maria. There are also inexpensive basic apartments and family packages available. Its restaurant (mains €17-20) serves imaginative Catalonian dishes.
Vilafranca del Penedès 6
5 Cal Ton CATALAN €€€
(938 903 741; www.restaurantcalton.com; Carrer Casal 8; mains €16-24; 1-4pm & 8.30-10.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-4pm Sun) Hidden away down a narrow side street, Cal Ton has a crisp, modern decor and offers inventive Mediterranean cuisine with a touch of oriental influence – all washed down with local wines.


=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================


========NEW


Barcelona’s Top 10


New Catalan Cuisine
2Barcelona’s most celebrated chefs blend traditional Catalan recipes with new cooking techniques to create deliciously inventive masterpieces. Leading the way are Albert Adrià, the molecular gastronomy whizz behind a growing empire of restaurants, and Carles Abellan, who elevated the humble tapas to high art in his restaurants. The result: Barcelona has become one of the world’s great culinary destinations. No matter where you go in the city, you won’t be far from a memorable meal. And the critics agree: the city has more than 20 Michelin-starred restaurants.


Camp Nou
5For the sports-minded, little can compete with the spectacle of a match at FC Barcelona’s massive football stadium. With a loyal fan base and an incredibly gifted team led by superstar Lionel Messi, Camp Nou always hosts a good show; even if you can’t make it to a game, it’s still worth visiting. The ‘Camp Nou Experience’ is an interactive museum and stadium tour that takes you through the locker rooms and out on to the pitch – hallowed ground for many Catalans.




Nightlife in Sant Antoni
9Barcelona is a city known for reinvention, but none of its neighbourhoods has seen a regeneration as dramatic as that of the unremarkable grid of streets around the splendid old Mercat Sant Antoni. It started with the tentative opening of a couple of hip cafes on Carrer del Parlament, but over the last couple of years this has bloomed into a lively strip of bars and restaurants, with an influx of hipster pleasure-seekers and entrepreneurs, and this in turn has kick-started a slew of openings in surrounding streets.
6Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni

BAR CALDERS | BAR CALDERS ©
Barcelona’s Top 10

Magical Montjuïc
10When the temperature rises, head up the hill to Montjuïc for fresh air and breathtaking views over the city, best enjoyed from the dizzy heights of a cable car. At any time of year it makes for a great day out, with endless parkland, themed gardens and museums to suit every taste, whether your fire is lit by sport, art or ancient remains. If you have kids in tow, the kitsch wonderland of the Poble Espanyol is a must.
1Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni




What’s New

Food Trucks
The city’s appetite for street food is apparently insatiable, and regular pop-up food markets now include Eat Street (http://eatstreet.barcelona), All Those (www.allthose.org) and Van Van (www.vanvanmarket.com).
Gaudí’s Hidden Townhouse
In a quiet backstreet of Gràcia, the spectacular facade of Gaudí’s Mudéjar-inspired Casa Vicens has long been an undervisited gem, but this changed at the end of 2017, when the building opened to the public for the first time.
Luxury with Pedigree
Soho House, London’s famous member’s club, has opened a bolt-hole in Barcelona, where regular punters can rub elbows with celebs and creative types in the stunning bar area.
Craft Makers
Hard on the heels of the gin craze, microbreweries have arrived in Barcelona, bringing an abundance of craft beer bars in their wake. You’re never far from a unique IPA, no matter where you roam.
Surfing with a Paddle
The increasingly popular sport for beach goers is gliding along on a stand-up paddleboard (SUP). Outfitters in Barceloneta hire out gear, and you can take a lesson if you’ve never tried.
The Meat-Free Revolution
Vegetarians and mindful eaters need not give Barcelona a pass when planning their next holiday. The city has seen an explosion of healthy animal-free eateries in recent years – and even vegan clothing shops.
Tapas Tours
Food and wine tours are a great – and leisurely – way to see the city and chat with a local at the same time. Some of the most knowledgeable guides are at Devour (www.devourbarcelonafoodtours.com), which has options for various budgets and time frames.
Poblenou Renaissance
This formerly industrial ‘hood is on the make, with new galleries, colourful shops and restaurants forming the intersection for the creative tech and design folk who are increasingly moving here.
Adrià’s Culinary Kingdom
Famed chef Albert Adrià now runs six celebrated restaurants all within strolling distance of one another in Sant Antoni. His latest, Enigma, opened in 2017 and is already considered one of the city’s best.



Arriving in Barcelona
El Prat airport Frequent aerobúses make the 35-minute run into town (€5.90) from 6am to 1am. Taxis cost around €26.
Estació Sants Long-distance trains arrive at this large station near the centre of town, which is linked by metro to other parts of the city.
Estació del Nord Barcelona’s long-haul bus station is located in L’Eixample, about 1.5km northeast of Plaça de Catalunya, and is a short walk from the Arc de Triomf metro station.
Girona-Costa Brava airport The ‘Barcelona Bus’ operated by Sagalés (one way/return €16/25, 1½ hours) is timed with Ryanair flights and goes direct to Barcelona’s Estació del Nord.
Reus airport Buses operated by Hispano-Igualadina (one way/return €16/25, 1½ hours) are timed with Ryanair flights and go direct to Barcelona’s Estació Sants.
For much more on arrival
Getting Around
Barcelona has abundant options for getting around town. The excellent metro can get you most places, with buses and trams filling in the gaps. Taxis are the best option late at night.
Metro The most convenient option. Runs 5am to midnight Sunday to Thursday, till 2am on Friday and 24 hours on Saturday. Targeta T-10 (10-ride passes; €10.20) are the best value; otherwise, it’s €2.20 per ride.
On foot To explore the old city, all you need is a good pair of walking shoes.



Be Forewarned
AViolent crime is rare in Barcelona, but petty crime (bag-snatching, pickpocketing) is a major problem.
AYou’re at your most vulnerable when dragging around luggage to or from your hotel; make sure you know your route before arriving.
ABe mindful of your belongings, particularly in crowded areas.
AAvoid walking around El Raval and the southern end of La Rambla late at night.
ADon’t wander down empty city streets at night. When in doubt, take a taxi.
ATake nothing of value to the beach and don’t leave anything unattended.






Top Itineraries

Day One
La Rambla & Barri Gòtic

MOn day one spend the morning exploring the narrow medieval lanes of the Barri Gòtic. Have a peek inside La Catedral – not missing its geese-filled cloister – and stroll through the picturesque squares of Plaça de Sant Josep Oriol and Plaça Reial. Discover Barcelona’s ancient roots in the fascinating Museu d’Història de Barcelona. Before lunch, have a wander down La Rambla to take in the passing people parade.
5Lunch The beautifully designed Federal whips up deliciously healthy fare.

La Ribera

RIn the afternoon, wander over to La Ribera, which is packed with architectural treasures. Have a look inside the majestic Basílica de Santa Maria del Mar. At the Museu Picasso, beautifully set inside conjoined medieval mansions, you can spend a few hours taking in the early works of one of the great artists of the 20th century.
5Dinner Sample tapas with global accents at creative El Atril.

La Ribera

NBefore having a late dinner (as is the custom in Spain), catch a show inside the Palau de la Música Catalana, one of the great Modernista masterpieces of Barcelona. Afterwards, end the night with tropically infused libations at candlelit Rubí.
Top Itineraries

Day Two
L’Eixample

MOn day two start with a morning visit to La Sagrada Família, Gaudí’s wondrous work in progress. It’s worth paying a little extra for a guided tour (or audioguide) for a deeper understanding of Barcelona’s most famous sight.
5Lunch Celebrated Disfrutar spreads an imaginative Catalan feast.

L’Eixample

RAfter lunch, explore more of the great Modernista buildings by taking a stroll down L’Eixample’s Passeig de Gràcia. Have a look at the three most famous buildings that make up the Manzana de la Discordia. Then visit one of Gaudí’s house museums on the street – either Casa Batlló or La Pedrera further up the avenue.
5Dinner Enjoy excellent wines and tasty sharing plates at Viblioteca.

Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta

NIn the evening catch a football match at Camp Nou, home of the top-ranked FC Barcelona. Amid the roar of the crowds, prepare for a serious adrenaline rush, especially if Barça is playing arch-rival Real Madrid. Afterwards explore lesser-known gems in the area, like the plaza-side El Maravillas (great for tapas and drinks) or Bangkok Cafe, serving Barcelona’s best Thai dishes.
Top Itineraries

Day Three
Barceloneta & the Waterfront 

MOn your third day in Barcelona it’s time to take in the lovely Mediterranean. Start the morning with a stroll, jog or bike ride along the waterfront. Beach-facing restaurants and cafes provide refreshment along the way.
5Lunch Go early to snag a table at tiny La Cova Fumada.

Barceloneta & the Waterfront 

RStroll through Barceloneta, stopping for a peek inside the Mercat de la Barceloneta and for pastries at Baluard.
5Dinner La Vinateria del Call has a magical setting in medieval El Call.

La Rambla & Barri Gòtic

NAt night catch a live band inside the Gothic quarter. Harlem Jazz Club and Jamboree are good bets for jazz and world music. If you still have energy, check out a few bars more off the beaten track, like L’Ascensor, a cosy drinking den with nicely mixed cocktails and a more grown-up crowd than other parts of Barri Gòtic.
Top Itineraries

Day Four
Montjuïc

MStart the day with a scenic cable-car ride up to Montjuïc, followed by a stroll past flower and sculpture gardens to the Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya. Take in the magnificent Romanesque frescos, vivid Gothic paintings and works by 17th-century Spanish masters.
5Lunch Pepa Tomate is a neighbourhood charmer on a peaceful square.

Gràcia

RAfter getting a taste of Montjuïc, hop on the metro up to Gràcia and wander through its enchanting village-like streets. Cafes, bookshops and vintage shops all make for some worthwhile exploring. The bars surrounding its plazas come to life around sundown.
5Dinner Order the excellent-value tasting menu from La Panxa del Bisbe.

El Raval

NTake in the bohemian side of Barcelona in El Raval. Browse record shops and vintage stores, check out a live band at the Jazz Sí Club, or watch an indie feature at the Filmoteca de Catalunya. Finish the night over a few housemade vermouths at La Confitería, or at dance favourite Moog for something livelier.





If You Like…

Markets
Els Encants Vells Sprawling flea market with plenty of treasures and trash on the edge of Poblenou.
Parks & Gardens
Parc de la Ciutadella Pretty landscaped grounds with dramatic fountain, curious sculptures, the Catalan parliament building and a zoo.
Park Güell Green wonderland with fine views over the city, and surreal sculptural architecture courtesy of Gaudí.
Jardí Botànic One of Montjuïc’s many lush gardens, this one with Mediterranean flora and plants from similar climates.
Parc de la Creueta del Coll Near Park Güell, this is a family favourite with pool, snack bar and trails.
Jardins del Laberint d’Horta Picturesque gardens with artificial lake and waterfalls and a challenging labyrinth, outside the city centre.

The labyrinth at Jardins del Laberint d’Horta | NASTY-N/SHUTTERSTOCK ©
Museums
CosmoCaixa Fun science museum that’s a hit with families – especially its recreated patch of Amazonian rainforest.
Museu-Monestir de Pedralbes Peaceful old convent with a 14th-century cloister and old-world religious artwork.
Museu Blau Spacious natural history and science museum with interactive exhibits and huge animal collection – dinosaurs included.
Art & Design
Fundació Joan Miró Temple to the great artist, complete with outdoor sculpture gardens.
Museu d’Art Contemporani de Barcelona Packed collection of 20th-century artwork in a modern Richard Meier–designed building.
Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC) Stunning collection of Romanesque art dating back 900 years.
CaixaForum Inside a modernist building designed by Puig i Cadafalch, this place hosts fantastic exhibitions.
Contemporary Architecture
Museu del Disseny de Barcelona Barcelona’s design museum lies inside this geometrical edifice that’s also a symbol of Poblenou’s rebirth.
Torre Glòries Jean Nouvel’s striking cucumber-shaped tower dominates the new high-tech zone of 22@.
Teatre Nacional de Catalunya This stately theatre is a perfect design medley of Ancient Greece with high modernism.
Edifici Fòrum Blue triangular building by Herzog & de Meuron that is both organic and weirdly futuristic.
Panoramic Views
Bunkers del Carmel Gaze 360-degrees from a scruffy hillside that was once an anti-aircraft battery.
Basílica del Sagrat Cor de Jesús It’s worth the trip to the top of Tibidabo for the mesmerising view.
Teleférico del Puerto Old-fashioned cable car (with modern cables, we’re told) affording sublime views from its dangling trajectory.
Mirablau Well-known Mirablau, at the foot of Tibidabo, has magnificent views out over the city.
Parc de Collserola Vast park with countless vistas (and wildlife, including roaming boars, to boot).
Staying Out Late
Guzzo Convivial drinking den in El Born with a funk-loving DJ owner.
Moog Small, fun and relatively attitude-free downtown club that’s great for dancing.
Sor Rita Kitsch-filled extravaganza with a fun, festive crowd.
La Confitería A fin-de-siècle mural-covered bar that was once a confectioner’s shop.
Marula Cafè Small, eclectic, dance-loving space in the Barri Gòtic with serious penchant for funk and soul.
For more top Barcelona spots, see the following:
AEating
ADrinking & Nightlife
AEntertainment
AShopping
AGay & Lesbian Barcelona 
Fashion
La Manual Alpargatera Birthplace of espadrilles, and world’s best place to buy the iconic Catalan rope-soled canvas shoes.
Lady Loquita One of many hip boutiques in Gràcia selling womenswear crafted by local designers.
L’Illa Diagonal Top shopping mall for designer fashion; also a good food court on the lower level.




Like a Local

Whether you’re a frequent visitor or a first-timer, taking a local approach when it comes to eating, drinking and other amusements offers a rewarding way to experience the city. You’ll find Catalans much more open if you try and blend in as much as you can (and learn a few words of Catalan).


Quimet i Quimet | MATT MUNRO/LONELY PLANET ©
When to Dine
In Barcelona, and elsewhere in Spain, meal times run late. Most restaurants don’t open for dinner until 8.30pm or 9pm and close at midnight or 1am; peak dining time is around 10pm. Locals commonly have lunch between 1pm and 4pm. This is then followed by a nice long siesta (a loll on the beach or in one of the parks is a fine choice when the weather is pleasant). Locals aren’t big on breakfast – a croissant and a cortado (espresso with milk) is a typical way to start the day.
Water & Wine
Lunch or dinner, wine is always a fine idea, according to most barcelonins. Luckily, many restaurants offer menú del día (menu of the day, or fixed price) lunches that include a glass of red or white. If you become a regular, waiters may give you complimentary refills or even leave the bottle. Of course, you can also opt for another drink.
A word on water: no one drinks it straight from the tap (taste it and you’ll know why). Order agua mineral, either con gas (sparkling) or sin gas (still).
Tapas
When hunger pains arrive in the afternoon or early evening, locals head out for a pre-dinner tapa. This means heading to the local favourite for a bite of anchovies, sausage, squid, wild mushrooms, roasted peppers or dozens of other tempting morsels. Wine, cava and beer all make fine accompaniments.
Many tapas spots are lively stand-around-the-bar affairs; Bormuth and Vaso de Oro are great places to start. When it’s time for a change of scenery, barcelonins might make their way to dinner or just head to another tapas bar and skip the sit-down formality altogether.
Local Meal Spots
La Rambla is fine for a stroll, but no local would eat there. The same holds for Carrer Ferran and other tourist-packed streets in Barri Gòtic. The Gòtic does, however, have some local-favoured gems, particularly on the narrow streets of the east side – such as Onofre and Cafè de l’Acadèmia. For a more authentic neighbourhood dining experience, browse the streets of El Born, Barceloneta, El Raval and Gràcia.
NEED TO KNOW

AMiniguide (http://miniguide.es) Culture, food, nightlife, fashion and more; published 10 times a year.
ABarcelona Cultura (http://barcelonacultura.bcn.cat) Upcoming cultural fare, including concerts, exhibitions and festivals.
ASpotted by Locals (www.spottedbylocals.com/barcelona) Reviews of favourite spots – restaurants, bars, cinemas, galleries and more, written by local residents/expats.
ABarça Central (http://barcacentral.com) The latest about FC Barcelona.
AIn & Out Barcelona (www.inandoutbarcelona.net) New restaurants, bars, cafes, shops and clubs with lovely photos – in Spanish.
Weekends
Many barcelonins head out of town at the weekends. That could mean skiing in the Pyrenees in winter, or heading up the Costa Brava in summer. Those that stick around might check out flea markets or produce markets, head to the beach or have an outing in the park. The parks are liveliest at weekends, when local musicians, picnickers, pop-up markets and playing children add to the city’s relaxed air. Culture-craving locals might hit an art opening – openings at CCCB and MACBA are good fun – see a rep film – Filmoteca de Catalunya has intriguing fare – or catch a concert, at Jazz Sí Club or Sala Apolo, perhaps.
The Sunday Feast
Sunday is typically the most peaceful day for Catalans, and a fine occasion for gathering with family or friends over a big meal. Lunch is the main event, and many restaurants prepare Sunday-only specials. Lots of places close on Sunday nights too, so it’s worth lingering over a long multi-course lunch. A rich paella in Barceloneta – try Barraca or Can Ros – followed by a long leisurely stroll along the waterfront is always a hit.
Festivals & Other Events
One of the best ways to join in local amusement is to come for one of the city’s big festivals. During summer (June to August), Música als Parcs features 30 or so open-air concerts at a dozen parks in Barcelona, and free concerts are held at various venues around the city. Stop in at a tourist office for the latest schedule. Other great open-air concerts that goes through summer include Festival Piknic Electronik and Festival Pedralbes.
Local Listings
If you can read some Spanish (Castilian), browse the latest art openings, film screenings, concerts and other events in the Guia del Ocio (www.guiadelocio.com), Time Out Barcelona (www.timeout.cat) or daily papers like La Vanguardia (www.lavanguardia.com) and El Periodico (www.elperiodico.com). Friday papers list the weekend’s events (most with pull-out supplements) and are often worth a read, even if your Spanish is limited. The council website (http://barcelonacultura.bcn.cat) also lists upcoming events.
Football
FC Barcelona plays a prominent role in the city’s imagination. Heading to a match at Camp Nou from September to May is the best way to catch a bit of Barcelona fever, but watching it on screen at a tavern can be just as much fun depending on the crowd. For the most fervent fan base, head to Barceloneta, El Raval, Gràcia or Sarrià, where you’ll find lively spots to catch a game. The daily journal Marca (www.marca.com) gives the latest on sporting news.
Tickets can be bought at www.fcbarcelona.com or FC Botiga.
Sardana
The traditional Catalan folk dance sardana still attracts a small local following. On weekends aficionados gather in front of La Catedral for group dancing to a live 10-piece band. The action happens at 6pm on Saturday and noon on Sunday and lasts about an hour.



For Free

With planning Barcelona can be a surprisingly affordable place to travel. Many museums offer free days, and some of the best ways to experience the city don’t cost a cent – hanging out on the beach, exploring fascinating neighbourhoods, and drinking in the views from hilltop heights.

Walking Tours
Numerous companies offer pay-what-you-wish walking tours. These typically take in the Barri Gòtic or the Modernista sites of L’Eixample. Recommended outfits include the following:
Discover Walks (www.discoverwalks.com)
Feel Free Tours (www.feelfreetours.com)
Orange Donut Tours (www.orangedonuttours.com)


Sights
Free
ACentre d’Art Santa Mònica
AEstadi Olímpic Lluís Companys
ACol·lecció de Carrosses Fúnebres
APalau del Lloctinent
ATemple d’August
AAntic Hospital de la Santa Creu
AFont Màgica
AJardins de Mossèn Cinto de Verdaguer 
ACementiri del Poblenou
AUniversitat de Barcelona

Sometimes free
AMuseu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya
ACastell de Montjuïc
AMuseu-Monestir de Pedralbes
AJardins del Laberint d’Horta
AMuseu de la Música



6Gràcia & Park Güell
Gràcia was an independent town until the 1890s, and its narrow lanes and picturesque plazas still have a village-like feel. Well-worn cafes and bars and vintage shops make it a magnet to a young, hip crowd. On a hill to the north lies one of Gaudí’s most captivating works, the outdoor Modernista storybook of Park Güell.
7Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta
Some of Barcelona’s most sacred sights are situated within the huge expanse stretching northwest beyond L’Eixample. One is the peaceful medieval monastery of Pedralbes; another is the great shrine to Catalan football, Camp Nou. Other reasons to venture here include an amusement park and great views atop Tibidabo, the wooded trails of Parc de Collserola, and a whizz-bang, kid-friendly science museum.
8Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni
The hillside overlooking the port has some of the city’s finest art collections: Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC), Fundació Joan Miró and CaixaForum. Other galleries, gardens and an imposing castle form part of the scenery. Just below Montjuïc lie the lively tapas bars and eateries of Poble Sec, while the up-and-coming neighbourhood of Sant Antoni draws the young and hip.




La Rambla & Barri Gòtic

Neighbourhood Top Five

Explore La Rambla & Barri Gòtic
Local Life
AHangouts For cocktails and kitsch whimsy, head to Sor Rita. Salterio is also a much-loved meeting spot.
Getting There & Away
ABus Airport and night buses arrive and depart from Plaça de Catalunya.
5 Best Places to Eat
ALa Vinateria del Call 
ACafè de l’Acadèmia
APla
AKoy Shunka
AOnofre
ARasoterra
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
AOcaña
ASor Rita
AL’Ascensor
APolaroid
For reviews, see here.
1 Best Historical Treasures
ATemple Romà d’August 
AVia Sepulcral Romana 
ASinagoga Major
ADomus de Sant Honorat 


DON’T MISS

ACentre d’Art Santa Mònica
AMosaïc de Miró
PRACTICALITIES

AMAP GOOGLE MAP, C5
AmCatalunya, Liceu, Drassanes
History


La Rambla de Santa Mònica
The final stretch of La Rambla widens out to approach the Mirador de Colom overlooking Port Vell. La Rambla here is named after the Convent de Santa Mònica, which once stood on the western flank of the street and has since been converted into the Centre d’Art Santa Mònica MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 567 11 10; http://artssantamonica.gencat.cat; La Rambla 7; h11am-9pm Tue-Sat, 11am-5pm Sun; mDrassanes) F, a cultural centre that mostly exhibits modern multimedia installations.



1SIGHTS

TEMPLE D’AUGUST
RUINS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 21 22; www.muhba.cat; Carrer del Paradis 10; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat, to 8pm Sun, to 2pm Mon; mJaume I) F
Opposite the southeast end of La Catedral, narrow Carrer del Paradis leads towards Plaça de Sant Jaume. Inside No 10, an intriguing building with Gothic and baroque touches, are four columns and the architrave of Barcelona’s main Roman temple, dedicated to Caesar Augustus and built to worship his imperial highness in the 1st century AD.
You are now standing on the highest point of Roman Barcino, Mont Tàber (a grand height of 16.9m – unlikely to induce altitude sickness). You may well find the door open outside the listed hours.


CAPELLA REIAL DE SANTA ÀGATACHURCH
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; MUHBA, Plaça del Rei; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat, to 2pm Mon, to 8pm Sun; mJaume I)
The 14th-century Capella Reial de Santa Àgata is the chapel of the Palau Reial Major (Grand Royal Palace), visited within the Museu d’Història de Barcelona. Outside, a spindly bell tower rises from the northeast side of Plaça del Rei. Inside, all is bare except for the 15th-century altarpiece and the magnificent techumbre (decorated timber ceiling). The altarpiece is considered to be one of Jaume Huguet’s finest surviving works.
HASH, MARIHUANA & HEMP MUSEUMMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 75 39; www.hashmuseum.com; Carrer Ample 35; adult/child under 13yr €9/free; h10am-10pm; mJaume I)
The world’s largest museum dedicated to all things cannabis-related opened to much fanfare in 2012 (even Virgin founder Richard Branson was at the opening). Set in the beautifully restored 16th-century Palau Mornau, exhibitions delve into the role the plant has played over the years, with 19th-century medicinal cannabis bottles, pulp film posters and consumer products made from hemp among the displays.

CAPELLA DE SANTA LLÚCIACHURCH
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Plaça de la Seu; h8am-7.30pm Mon-Fri, to 8pm Sat & Sun; mJaume I) F
One of the few reminders of Romanesque Barcelona (although the interior is largely Gothic), the Capella de Santa Llúcia is located in the northwest corner of the claustre (cloister) in the Catedral, but originally was the chapel for the adjacent Bishop’s Palace.

TOP SIGHT
PALAU CENTELLES
ARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Baixada de Sant Miquel 8; mJaume I)
A rare 15th-century gem, Palau Centelles is on the corner of Baixada de Sant Miquel. You can wander into the fine Gothic-Renaissance courtyard if the gates are open.
ESGLÉSIA DE SANTS JUST I PASTORCHURCH
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 74 33; www.basilicasantjust.cat; Plaça de Sant Just; h11am-2pm & 5-9pm Mon & Wed-Sat, to 8pm Tue, 10am-1pm Sun; mJaume I)
This somewhat neglected, single-nave church, with chapels on either side of the buttressing, was built in 1342 in Catalan Gothic style on what is reputedly the site of the oldest parish church in Barcelona. Inside, you can admire some fine stained-glass windows. In front of it, in a pretty little square that was used as a film set (a smelly Parisian marketplace) in 2006 for Perfume: The Story of a Murderer, is what’s claimed to be the city’s oldest Gothic fountain.
On the morning of 11 September 1924, Antoni Gaudí was arrested as he attempted to enter the church from this square to attend Mass. In those days of the dictatorship of General Primo de Rivera, it took little to ruffle official feathers, and Gaudí’s refusal to speak Spanish to the overbearing Guardia Civil officers who had stopped him earned him the better part of a day in the cells until a friend came to bail him out.
There are guided tours from Monday to Saturday (€5, or €10 including the bell tower).
PALAU DEL LLOCTINENTHISTORIC SITE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer dels Comtes; h10am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I) F
This converted 16th-century palace has a peaceful courtyard worth wandering through. Have a look upwards from the main staircase to admire the extraordinary timber artesonado, a sculpted ceiling made to seem like the upturned hull of a boat. Temporary exhibitions, usually related in some way to the archives, are often held here.
Next to the Plaça del Rei, the palau (palace) was built in the 1550s as the residence of the Spanish lloctinent (viceroy) of Catalonia and later converted into a convent. From 1853 it housed the Arxiu de la Corona d’Aragón, a unique archive with documents detailing the history of the Crown of Aragón and Catalonia, starting in the 12th century and reaching to the 20th.

DOMUS DE SANT HONORATARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 21 00; www.museuhistoria.bcn.cat; Carrer de la Fruita 2; adult/concession/child €2/1.50/free, 1st Sun of month free; h10am-2pm Sun; mJaume I)
The remains of a Roman domus (town house) have been unearthed and opened to the public. The house (and vestiges of three small shops) lies close to the Roman forum and the owners were clearly well off. Apart from providing something of an idea of daily Roman life through these remains, the location also contains six medieval grain silos installed during the period when this was the Jewish quarter, El Call.
The whole site is housed in the mid-19th-century Casa Morell. So, in an unusual mix, one gets a glimpse of three distinct periods in history in the same spot.

MUSEU DE L’ERÒTICAMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Erotica Museum; %93 318 98 65; www.erotica-museum.com; La Rambla 96; €10; h10am-midnight; mLiceu)
Observe what naughtiness people have been getting up to since ancient times in this museum, with historical relics such as Indian bas-reliefs showing various aspects of tantric love, 18th-century wood carvings depicting Kama Sutra positions, Japanese porcelain porn and African fornication carvings. Despite the premise, overall it’s a rather buttoned-up affair, and probably not worth the steep admission price (despite the free drink).

VIA SEPULCRAL ROMANAARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 21 22; www.muhba.cat; Plaça de la Vila de Madrid; adult/concession/child €2/1.50/free; h11am-2pm Tue & Thu, to 7pm Sat & Sun; mCatalunya)
Along Carrer de la Canuda, a block east of the top end of La Rambla, is a sunken garden where a series of Roman tombs lies exposed. A smallish display in Spanish and Catalan by the tombs explores burial and funerary rites and customs. A few bits of pottery (including a burial amphora with the skeleton of a three-year-old Roman child) accompany the display.
The burial ground stretches along either side of the road that led northwest out of Barcelona’s Roman predecessor, Barcino. Roman law forbade burial within city limits and so everyone, the great and humble, were generally buried along roads leading out of cities.
2Neighbourhood Walk
Hidden Treasures in the Barri Gòtic

START LA CATEDRAL
END PLAÇA DEL REI
LENGTH 1.5KM; 1½ HOURS
This scenic walk through the Barri Gòtic will take you back in time, from the early days of Roman-era Barcino through to the medieval era.
Before entering the cathedral, have a look at 1three Picasso friezes on the building facing the square. After noting his signature style, wander through 2La Catedral; don’t miss the cloister with its flock of 13 geese. Leaving the cathedral, enter the former gates of the ancient fortified city and turn right into 3Plaça de Sant Felip Neri. Note the shrapnel-scarred walls of the old church, damaged by pro-Francoist bombers in 1938. A plaque commemorates the victims (mostly children) of the bombing.
Head out of the square and turn right. On this narrow lane, you’ll spot a small 4statue of Santa Eulàlia, one of Barcelona’s patron saints who suffered various tortures during her martyrdom. Make your way west to the looming 14th-century 5Església de Sant Maria del Pi, which is famed for its magnificent rose window. Follow the curving road and zigzag down to 6Plaça Reial, one of Barcelona’s prettiest squares. Flanking the fountain are lamp posts designed by Antoni Gaudí.
Stroll up to Carrer de la Boqueria and turn left on Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call. This leads into the El Call district, once the heart of the medieval Jewish quarter, until the bloody pogrom of 1391. The 7Sinagoga Major, one of Europe’s oldest, was discovered in 1996. Head across Plaça de Sant Jaume and turn left after Carrer del Bisbe. You’ll soon pass the entrance to the remnants of a 8Roman Temple, with four columns hidden in a small courtyard.
The final stop is 9Plaça del Rei, a picturesque plaza where Fernando and Isabel received Columbus following his first New World voyage. The former palace today houses a superb history museum, with significant Roman ruins underground.
5EATING

FEDERALCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 280 81 71; www.federalcafe.es; Passatge de la Pau 11; mains €7-10; h9am-11pm Mon-Thu, to 11.30pm Fri & Sat, 9am-5pm Sun; W; mDrassanes)
Don’t be intimidated by the industrial chic, the sea of open MacBooks or the stack of design mags – this branch of the Poble Sec Federal mothership is incredibly welcoming, with healthy, hearty and good-value food. Choose a salad and a topping (poached eggs, strips of chicken) or a yellow curry, say, and follow it up with a moist slab of carrot cake.
LA PLATATAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 10 09; www.barlaplata.com; Carrer de la Mercè 28; tapas €2.50-5; h9am-3.30pm & 6.30-11.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
Tucked away on a narrow lane near the waterfront, La Plata is a humble but well-loved bodega that serves just three plates: pescadito frito (small fried fish), butifarra (sausage) and tomato salad. Add in the drinkable, affordable wines (per glass €1.20) and you have the makings of a fine predinner tapas spot.
MILKINTERNATIONAL€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 09 22; www.milkbarcelona.com; Carrer d’en Gignàs 21; mains €9-12; h9am-2am Thu-Mon, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
Also known to many as an enticing cocktail spot, Irish-run Milk’s key role for Barcelona night owls is providing morning-after brunches (served till 4.30pm). Avoid direct sunlight and tuck into pancakes, eggs Benedict and other hangover dishes in a cosy lounge-like setting complete with ornate wallpaper, framed prints on the wall and cushion-lined seating. The musical selection is also notable.
BENEDICTBRUNCH€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 250 75 11; www.benedictbcn.com; Carrer d’en Gignás 23; mains €10-11; h9am-4pm Mon, 9am-4pm & 7pm-2am Tue-Fri, 9am-2.30am Sat & Sun; W; mJaume I)
As the name suggests, brunch is the main event at friendly little Benedict, with eggs prepared every which way and an option for the full English fry-up. There’s also a list of handmade burgers and club sandwiches, and in the evening various tapas are served, along with onion rings, deep-fried brie, chicken wings and other American favourites.
TALLER DE TAPASCATALAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 80 20; www.tallerdetapas.com; Plaça de Sant Josep Oriol 9; mains €7-10; hnoon-1am May-Sep, noon-midnight Oct-Apr; W; mLiceu)
A well-placed spot with outdoor seating on Plaça de Sant Josep Oriol, with a long list of tapas and more substantial bites.
ALCOBA AZULMEDITERRANEAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 81 41; Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call 14; mains €6-10; h6pm-midnight; W; mJaume I)
Peel back the centuries inside this remarkably atmospheric watering hole, with medieval walls, low ceilings, wooden floors and flickering candles. Grab one of the seats at the tiny bar in front or slide into one of the table booths at the back, where you can enjoy good wines by the glass, satisfying plates of stuffed peppers, salads, tostas (sandwiches) and blood sausage with caramelised onions.
XURRERIACHURROS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 76 91; Carrer dels Banys Nous 8; cone €1.20; h7am-1.30pm & 3.30-8.15pm Mon-Fri, 7am-2pm & 3.30-8.30pm Sat & Sun; mJaume I)
It doesn’t look much from the outside, but this brightly lit street joint is Barcelona’s best spot for paper cones of piping-hot churros – long batter sticks fried and sprinkled with sugar and best enjoyed dunked in hot chocolate.
CERVECERÍA TALLER DE TAPASTAPAS, CATALAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 481 62 33; www.tallerdetapas.com; Carrer Comtal 28; mains €7-10; h9am-1am Mon-Fri, noon-1am Sat & Sun Mar-Sep, to midnight daily Oct-Feb; W; mUrquinaona)
Amid white stone walls and a beamed ceiling, this buzzing, easy-going place serves a broad selection of tapas as well as changing daily specials like cochinillo (roast suckling pig). A smattering of beers from across the globe – Leffe Blonde, Guinness, Brahma (Brazil) and Sol (Mexico) – add to the appeal.
It has a few other locations around town, including a well-placed spot with outdoor seating on Plaça de Sant Josep Oriol .
FORNERIA TIANABAKERY€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 18 06; www.caltiana.cat; Carrer Ample 27; sandwiches around €3; h7am-10pm; W; mJaume I)
Stop in this bright corner bakery and cafe for fresh pastries, croissants, cheese, charcuterie, quiches and other light bites. Staff whip up a decent coffee, though there’s also wine and other refreshments.
oCAFÈ DE L’ACADÈMIACATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 82 53; Carrer dels Lledó 1; mains €15-20; h1-3.30pm & 8-11pm Mon-Fri; W; mJaume I)
Expect a mix of traditional Catalan dishes with the occasional creative twist. At lunchtime, local city hall workers pounce on the menú del día (€15.75). In the evening it is rather more romantic, as low lighting emphasises the intimacy of the beamed ceiling and stone walls. On warm days you can also dine in the pretty square at the front.
oLA VINATERIA DEL CALLSPANISH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 60 92; www.lavinateriadelcall.com; Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call 9; raciones €7-12; h7.30pm-1am; W; mJaume I)
In a magical setting in the former Jewish quarter, this tiny jewel-box of a restaurant serves up tasty Iberian dishes including Galician octopus, cider-cooked chorizo and the Catalan escalivada (roasted peppers, aubergine and onions) with anchovies. Portions are small and made for sharing, and there’s a good and affordable selection of wines.
CAN CULLERETESCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 30 22; www.culleretes.com; Carrer d’en Quintana 5; mains €10-18; h1.30-3.45pm & 8-10.45pm Tue-Sat, 1.30-3.45pm Sun; W; mLiceu)
Founded in 1786, Barcelona’s oldest restaurant is still going strong, with tourists and locals flocking here to enjoy its rambling interior, old-fashioned tile-filled decor and enormous helpings of traditional Catalan food, including fresh seafood and sticky stews. From Tuesday to Friday there is a fixed lunch menu for €14.50.
BELMONTETAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 76 84; Carrer de la Mercè 29; tapas €4-10, mains €13-14; h8pm-midnight Tue-Fri, 1-3.30pm & 8pm-midnight Sat Jul-Oct, 7.30pm-midnight Tue-Thu, 1-3.30pm & 7.30pm-midnight Fri & Sat Oct-Jun; W; mJaume I)
This tiny tapas joint in the southern reaches of Barri Gòtic whips up beautifully prepared small plates – including an excellent truita (tortilla), rich patatons a la sal (salted new potatoes with romesco sauce) and tender carpaccio de pop (octopus carpaccio). Wash it down with the homemade vermut (vermouth).
OCAÑAINTERNATIONAL€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 676 48 14; www.ocana.cat; Plaça Reial 13; mains €9.50-16; hnoon-2am Sun-Thu, to 2.30am Fri & Sat; W; mLiceu)
A flamboyant but elegantly designed space of high ceilings, chandeliers and plush furnishings, Ocaña blends late-night carousing with serious eating. The Spanish and Catalan dishes are given a creative and successful twist, and are now complemented on Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights by a superb selection of Mexican dishes.
You can still have a cocktail at Moorish-inspired Apotheke downstairs, or out on the Plaça Reial terrace, but it’s a shame to pass up on the culinary offering.
LEVANTEINTERNATIONAL€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %620 470283; Placeta de Manuel Ribé 1; sharing plates €8-10; h9am-midnight Tue-Sat, from 11am Sun; mJaume I)
Opened in 2017, Levante is a small but sunny space with a ‘mezze’ approach to eating whereby diners can share, for example, meatballs with butternut squash or a zingy plum and fennel tart. Brunch is also served and includes superb brioche; rye bread topped with smoked mackerel and horseradish; or pita with roast tomatoes, grapes, basil and tahini.
BLACK REMEDYCAFE€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 461 92 12; www.blackremedy.com; Carrer de la Ciutat 5; mains €9-14; h9am-7pm Mon-Sat, 11am-5.30pm Sun; mJaume I)
Craft beer? Check. Pulled pork sandwiches? Check. Half the clientele tapping into MacBooks? Check. Black Remedy is the latest hipster joint in the slow transformation of the Barri Gòtic, a gallery-like space with floor-to-ceiling windows for those who like to see and be seen. Pluses include great coffee, cold-pressed juices and bottled artisanal beers, and an all-day brunch on Sundays.
OPERA SAMFAINACATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 481 78 71; www.operasamfaina.com; La Rambla 51; mains €11-15, Odissea tasting menu adult/child under 12yr €33/€20; h6pm-midnight Mon-Wed, to 1am Thu & Fri, 1pm-1am Sat, 1pm-midnight Sun; mLiceu)
A surreal sensory experience deep in the bowels of the Liceu opera house. Enter through the Vermuteria, a tenebrous tapas bar, and then either head to the Odissea – a shared table, surrounded by audiovisuals – for a tasting menu of traditional Catalan dishes; or down to the Opera Prima, a dreamlike labyrinth of wine and tapas bars and psychedelic installations.
The celebrated Roca brothers, of former Best Restaurant in the World El Celler de Can Roca, are behind the project, which takes visitors on a playful journey through Catalan mythology via the food of the region.
RASOTERRAVEGETARIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 69 26; www.rasoterra.cat; Carrer del Palau 5; platillos €6-10, lunch menu €13; h1-4pm & 7-11pm Tue-Sun; Wv; mJaume I)
Slow food advocates at Rasoterra cook up first-rate vegetarian dishes in a Zen-like setting with tall ceilings, low-playing jazz and fresh flowers on the tables. The creative, globally influenced menu changes regularly and might feature Vietnamese-style coconut pancakes with tofu and vegetables, beluga lentils with basmati rice, and pear and goat cheese quesadillas. Good vegan and gluten-free options.
MIRILLAINTERNATIONAL€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 176 57 47; Carrer de Regomir 16; platillos €4.50-16; h7-11.30pm Tue-Sat; mJaume I)
Mirilla is a great place to stumble upon, with excellent wines by the glass and well-executed cocktails, along with a range of platillos (somewhere between a tapa and a main course) that includes cod ceviche, pork with wild mushrooms and mackerel teriyaki. It’s a cosy little place and fills up fast. Reserve if you can.
ONOFRESPANISH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 69 37; www.onofre.net; Carrer de les Magdalenes 19; mains €7-13; h10am-4pm & 7.30-11.30pm Mon-Fri, noon-11.30pm Sat; W; mJaume I)
Famed for its (good, affordable) wine selections, Onofre is a small, modern restaurant (and wine shop and delicatessen) that has a strong local following for its delicious dishes such as Italian greens with foie shavings, duck confit, codfish carpaccio and baked prawns. The menú (€10.75) is excellent value.
CERERÍAVEGETARIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 85 10; Baixada de Sant Miquel 3; mains €8-15; h1-11pm Tue-Sat, to 6pm Sun; Wv; mJaume I)
Black-and-white marble floors, a smattering of old wooden tables and ramshackle displays of musical instruments lend a certain bohemian charm to this small vegetarian restaurant. The pizzas are delicious and feature organic ingredients – as do the flavourful galettes, dessert crêpes and bountiful salads. Vegan options too.
PLAFUSION€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 412 65 52; www.restaurantpla.cat; Carrer de la Bellafila 5; mains €17-23; h1.30-5.30pm & 7-11.30pm Sun-Thu, to midnight Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
One of Gòtic’s long-standing favourites, Pla is a stylish, romantically lit medieval dining room where the cooks churn out such temptations as oxtail braised in red wine, seared tuna with oven-roasted peppers, and polenta with seasonal mushrooms.
ALLIUMCATALAN, FUSION€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 30 03; www.alliumrestaurant.es; Carrer del Call 17; mains €15-18; h8am-5pm Mon-Fri, 10am-4pm & 7pm-midnight Sat, noon-5pm Sun; W; mLiceu)
This bright, modern tapas bar and restaurant serves mostly Catalan dishes with varying specials (including seafood paella for one). The menu, which changes every two or three weeks, focuses on seasonal, organic cuisine. Its kitchen is open all day, making it a good bet for those who don’t want to wait until 9pm for a meal.
KOY SHUNKAJAPANESE€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 412 79 39; www.koyshunka.com; Carrer de Copons 7; tasting menu €89-132; h1.30-3pm & 8.30-11pm Tue-Sat, 1.30-3pm Sun; mUrquinaona)
Down a narrow lane north of the cathedral, Koy Shunka opens a portal to exquisite dishes from the East – mouth-watering sushi, sashimi, seared Wagyu beef and flavour-rich seaweed salads are served alongside inventive cooked fusion dishes such as steamed clams with sake or tempura of scallops and king prawns with Japanese mushrooms. Don’t miss the house speciality of tender toro (tuna belly).
Most diners sit at the large wraparound counter, where you can watch the culinary wizardry in action. Set multicourse menus are pricey but well worth it for those seeking a truly extraordinary dining experience.
ELS QUATRE GATSCATALAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 41 40; www.4gats.com; Carrer de Montsió 3; mains €23-29; h1-4pm & 7pm-1am; mUrquinaona)
Once the lair of Barcelona’s Modernista artists, Els Quatre Gats is a stunning example of the movement, inside and out, with its colourful tiles, geometric brickwork and wooden fittings. The restaurant is not quite as thrilling as its setting, though you can just have a coffee and a croissant in the cafe (open from 9am to 1am) at the front.
THE SWEET LIFE

Barcelona has some irresistible temptations for those with a sweet tooth. Chocolate lovers won’t want to miss Carrer del Petritxol, which is home to several famous granjas (milk bars) that dole out thick cups of hot chocolate, best accompanied by churros. The recommended Granja La Pallaresa always draws a crowd.
At Christmas specialist sweet stores fill with turrón, the traditional holiday temptation. Essentially nougat, it comes in different varieties: softer blocks are turrón de Valencia and a harder version is turrón de Gijón. You can find the treat year-round at stores such as Torrons Vicens, which has been selling its signature sweets since 1775.
Other not-to-be-missed spots include Caelum, and La Colmena .
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

L’ASCENSORCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 53 47; Carrer de la Bellafila 3; h6pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri-Sun; W; mJaume I)
Named after the lift (elevator) doors that serve as the front door, this elegant drinking den with its vaulted brick ceilings, vintage mirrors and marble-topped bar gathers a faithful crowd that comes for old-fashioned cocktails and lively conversation against a soundtrack of up-tempo jazz and funk.
SOR RITABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 176 62 66; www.sorritabar.es; Carrer de la Mercè 27; h7pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
A lover of all things kitsch, Sor Rita is pure eye candy, from its leopard-print wallpaper to its high-heel-festooned ceiling and deliciously irreverent decorations inspired by the films of Almodóvar. It’s a fun and festive scene, with special-event nights including tarot readings on Mondays, all-you-can-eat snack buffets (€7) on Tuesdays and karaoke on Thursdays.
LA GRANJACAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 69 75; Carrer dels Banys Nous 4; h9am-9pm; W; mJaume I)
This long-running cafe serves up thick, rich cups of chocolate, in varying formats, but it doesn’t make its own churros. Buy them a few doors down at Xurreria and bring them here for the perfect combo of churros dipped in chocolate. Also worth a look is the section of Roman wall visible at the back.
POLAROIDBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 186 66 69; www.polaroidbar.es; Carrer dels Còdols 29; h7.30pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mDrassanes)
For a dash of 1980s nostalgia, Polaroid is a blast from the past, with its wall-mounted VHS tapes, old film posters, comic-book-covered tables, action-figure displays and other kitschy decor. Not surprisingly, it draws a fun, unpretentious crowd who come for cheap cañas (draught beer), mojitos and free popcorn.
MARULA CAFÉBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 76 90; www.marulacafe.com; Carrer dels Escudellers 49; cover up to €10; h11pm-5am Mon-Thu & Sun, 11.30pm-6am Fri, 9.30pm-6am Sat; mLiceu)
A fantastic find in the heart of the Barri Gòtic, Marula will transport you to the 1970s and the best in funk and soul. James Brown fans will think they’ve died and gone to heaven. It’s not, however, a mono-thematic place: DJs slip in other tunes, from breakbeat to house. Samba and other Brazilian dance sounds also penetrate here.
CAELUMCAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 69 93; Carrer de la Palla 8; h10am-8.30pm Mon-Fri, to 9pm Sat & Sun; W; mLiceu)
Centuries of heavenly gastronomic tradition from across Spain are concentrated in this exquisite medieval space in the heart of the city. The upstairs cafe is a dainty setting for decadent cakes and pastries, while descending into the underground chamber with its stone walls and flickering candles is like stepping into the Middle Ages.
Wherever you decide to sit, you’ll also pass through the shop that sells sweets (such as the irresistible marzipan from Toledo) made by nuns in convents across the country.
CAFÈ DE L’ÒPERACAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 75 85; www.cafeoperabcn.com; La Rambla 74; h8am-2am; W; mLiceu)
Opposite the Gran Teatre del Liceu is La Rambla’s most traditional cafe. Operating since 1929 and still popular with opera-goers, it is pleasant enough for an early evening libation or, in the morning, coffee and croissants. Head upstairs for a seat overlooking the busy boulevard, and try the house speciality, the cafè de l’Òpera (coffee with chocolate mousse).
SALTERIOCAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 50 28; Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call 4; hnoon-1am; W; mJaume I)
A wonderfully photogenic candlelit spot tucked down a tiny lane in El Call, Salterio serves Turkish coffee, authentic mint teas and snacks amid stone walls, incense and ambient Middle Eastern music. If hunger strikes, try the sardo (grilled flat-bread covered with pesto, cheese or other toppings).
BOADASCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 95 92; www.boadascocktails.com; Carrer dels Tallers 1; hnoon-2am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mCatalunya)
One of the city’s oldest cocktail bars, Boadas is famed for its daiquiris. Bow-tied waiters have been serving up unique, drinkable creations since Miguel Boadas opened it in 1933 – in fact Miró and Hemingway both drank here. Miguel was born in Havana, where he was the first barman at the immortal La Floridita.
GRANJA LA PALLARESACAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 20 36; www.lapallaresa.com; Carrer del Petritxol 11; h9am-1pm & 4-9pm Mon-Sat, 9am-1pm & 5-9pm Sun; W; mLiceu)
An old-school cafe filled with families and specialising in cakes, churros and hot chocolate.
BOSC DE LES FADESLOUNGE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 26 49; Passatge de la Banca 5; h10am-1am Mon-Fri, from 11am Sat & Sun; mDrassanes)
The ‘Forest of the Fairies’ is touristy but offers a whimsical retreat from the busy Rambla nearby, and has a wonderfully kitsch charm. Lounge chairs and lamplit tables are scattered beneath an indoor forest complete with trickling fountain and grotto. Bocadillos and snacks are available.
MANCHESTERBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %627 733081; Carrer de Milans 5; h6.30pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mLiceu) S
A drinking den that has undergone several transformations over the years now treats you to the sounds of great Manchester bands, from Joy Division to Oasis, but probably not the Hollies. It has a pleasing rough-and-tumble feel, with tables jammed in every which way. There are DJs on Thursdays.
KARMACLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 56 80; www.karmadisco.com; Plaça Reial 10; hnoon-5am Tue-Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
During the week Karma plays good, mainstream indie music, while on weekends the DJs spin anything from rock to disco. A golden oldie in Barcelona, tunnel-shaped Karma is small and becomes quite tightly packed (claustrophobic for some) with a good-natured crowd of locals and out-of-towners. The bar and terrace on the Plaça Reial open at noon, but the club opens at midnight.
LA MACARENACLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 30 64; www.macarenaclub.com; Carrer Nou de Sant Francesc 5; cover €5-10; hmidnight-5am Sun-Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat; mDrassanes)
You won’t believe this was once a tile-lined Andalucian flamenco musos’ bar. Now it is a dark dance space, of the kind where it is possible to sit at the bar, meet people around you and then stand up for a bit of a shake to the DJ’s electro and house offerings, all within about five square metres.
LA CLANDESTINACAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 05 33; Baixada de Viladecols 2; h10am-10pm Wed-Mon; W; mJaume I)
Globally inspired options here include tea, Turkish coffee, mango lassi, quiche and panini, along with wine and beer. La Clandestina’s white walls are enlivened with gold-painted beams and a changing display of local artwork for sale, under which sit youngish locals, often tapping away on laptops.
ČAJ CHAICAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 95 92; www.cajchai.com; Carrer de Sant Domènec del Call 12; h10.30am-10pm; mJaume I)
Inspired by Prague’s bohemian tearooms, this bright and buzzing cafe in the heart of the old Jewish quarter is a tea connoisseur’s paradise. Čaj Chai stocks around 200 teas from China, India, Korea, Japan, Nepal, Morocco and beyond. It’s a much-loved local haunt.
OVISOBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 304 37 26; www.barnawood.com; Carrer d’Arai 5; h9am-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mLiceu)
Oviso is a popular budget-friendly restaurant with outdoor tables on the plaza, but shows its true bohemian colours by night, with a mixed crowd, a rock-and-roll vibe and a rustic decorated two-room interior plastered with curious murals – geese taking flight, leaping dolphins and blue peacocks framing the brightly painted concrete walls.
BOULEVARDCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %673 272480; www.boulevardcultureclub.es; La Rambla 27; cover up to €9; hmidnight-5.45am Sun-Thu, to 6.30am Fri & Sat; mDrassanes)
Boulevard is flanked by striptease bars (in the spirit of the lower Rambla’s old days), and has undergone countless reincarnations. With three different dance spaces, one of them upstairs, it has a deliciously tacky feel, pumping out anything from 1980s hits to house music (especially on Saturdays in the main room). There’s no particular dress code.
BEST CAFES

Some of Barcelona’s most atmospheric cafes lie hidden in the old cobbled lanes of Barri Gòtic. Our favourite spots for a pick-me-up include:
Salterio
Čaj Chai
La Clandestina
Caelum
Cafè de l’Òpera
La Granja
3ENTERTAINMENT

EL PARAIGUALIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 11 31; www.elparaigua.com; Carrer del Pas de l’Ensenyança 2; hnoon-2am Sun-Wed, to 1am Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mLiceu) F
A tiny chocolate box of dark tinted Modernisme, the ‘Umbrella’ has been serving up drinks since the 1960s. The turn-of-the-20th-century decor was transferred here from a shop knocked down elsewhere in the district and cobbled back together to create this cosy locale.
Take a trip in time from Modernisme to medieval by heading downstairs to the brick and stone basement bar area. Amid 11th-century walls, live bands – funk, soul, rock, blues – hold court on Fridays and Saturdays (from 11.30pm).
HARLEM JAZZ CLUBJAZZ
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 07 55; www.harlemjazzclub.es; Carrer de la Comtessa de Sobradiel 8; tickets €7-10; h8pm-3am Sun & Tue-Thu, to 5am Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
This narrow, old-city dive is one of the best spots in town for jazz, as well as funk, Latin, blues and gypsy jazz. It attracts a mixed crowd that maintains a respectful silence during the acts. Most concerts start around 10pm. Get in early if you want a seat in front of the stage.
SIDECAR FACTORY CLUBLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 15 86; www.sidecarfactoryclub.com; Plaça Reial 7; h7pm-5am Mon-Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
Descend into the red-tinged, brick-vaulted bowels for live music most nights. Just about anything goes here, from UK indie through to country punk, but rock and pop lead the way. Most shows start around 10pm and DJs take over at 12.30am. Upstairs at ground level you can get food (until midnight) or a few drinks (until 3am).
JAMBOREELIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 17 89; www.masimas.com/jamboree; Plaça Reial 17; tickets €5-20; h8pm-6am; mLiceu)
For over half a century, Jamboree has been bringing joy to the jivers of Barcelona, with high-calibre acts featuring jazz trios, blues, Afrobeats, Latin and big-band sounds. Two concerts are held most nights (at 8pm and 10pm), after which Jamboree morphs into a DJ-spinning club at midnight. WTF jam sessions are held Mondays (entrance a mere €5).
Buy tickets online to save a few euros.
L’ATENEUCLASSICAL MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 343 61 21; www.ateneubcn.org; Carrer de la Canuda 6; tickets €0-10; mCatalunya)
This historic private library and cultural centre (dating back 150 years) hosts a range of high-brow fare, from classical recitals to film screenings and literary readings.
SALA TARANTOSFLAMENCO
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 304 12 10; www.masimas.com/tarantos; Plaça Reial 17; tickets €15; hshows 7.30pm, 8.30pm & 9.30pm Oct-Jun, plus 10.30pm Jul-Sep; mLiceu)
Since 1963, this basement locale has been the stage for up-and-coming flamenco groups performing in Barcelona. These days Tarantos has become a mostly tourist-centric affair, with half-hour shows held three times a night. Still, it’s a good introduction to flamenco, and not a bad setting for a drink.

7 SHOPPING
TORRONS VICENSFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 304 37 36; www.vicens.com; Carrer del Petritxol 15; h10am-8.30pm Mon-Sat, 11am-8pm Sun; mLiceu)
You can find the turrón (nougat) treat year-round at Torrons Vicens, which has been selling its signature sweets since 1775.
SABATER HERMANOSCOSMETICS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 98 32; www.sabaterhermanos.es; Plaça de Sant Felip Neri 1; h10.30am-9pm; mJaume I)
This fragrant little shop sells handcrafted soaps of all sizes. Varieties such as fig, cinnamon, grapefruit and chocolate smell good enough to eat, while sandalwood, magnolia, mint, cedar and jasmine add spice to any sink or bathtub.
FORMATGERIA LA SEUFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 412 65 48; www.formatgerialaseu.com; Carrer de la Dagueria 16; h10am-2pm & 5-8pm Tue-Sat Sep-Jul; mJaume I)
Dedicated to artisan cheeses from all across Spain, this small shop is run by the oh-so-knowledgeable Katherine McLaughlin and is the antithesis of mass production – it sells only the best from small-scale farmers and the stock changes regularly. Wine and cheese tastings in the cosy room at the back are fun.
ESCRIBÀFOOD & DRINKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 60 27; www.escriba.es; La Rambla 83; h9am-9.30pm; W; mLiceu)
Chocolates, dainty pastries and mouth-watering cakes can be nibbled behind the Modernista mosaic facade here or taken away for private, guilt-ridden consumption. This Barcelona favourite is owned by the Escribà family, a name synonymous with sinfully good sweet things. More than that, it adds a touch of authenticity to La Rambla.
HERBORISTERIA DEL REICOSMETICS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 05 12; www.herboristeriadelrei.com; Carrer del Vidre 1; h2.30-8.30pm Tue-Thu, 10.30am-8.30pm Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
Once patronised by Queen Isabel II, this timeless corner store flogs all sorts of weird and wonderful herbs, spices and medicinal plants. It’s been doing so since 1823 and the decor has barely changed since the 1860s – some of the products have, however, and nowadays you’ll find anything from fragrant soaps to massage oil.
Film director Tom Tykwer shot scenes from Perfume: The Story of a Murderer here.
DRAP-ARTARTS & CRAFTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 48 89; www.drapart.org; Carrer Groc 1; h11am-2pm & 5-8pm Tue-Fri, 6-9pm Sat; mJaume I)
A non-profit arts organisation runs this small store and gallery space, which exhibits wild designs made from recycled products. Works change regularly, but you might find sculptures, jewellery, handbags and other accessories from artists near and far, as well as mixed-media installations.
LA COLMENAFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 13 56; www.pastisserialacolmena.com; Plaça de l’Angel 12; h9am-9pm; mJaume I)
A pastry shop selling many delicacies including pine-nut-encrusted panellets (sweet almond cakes), flavoured meringues and feather-light ensaïmadas (soft, sweet buns topped with powdered sugar) from Mallorca.
COIN & STAMP MARKETMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Mercat de Numismàtica i Filatèlia; Plaça Reial; h9am-2.30pm Sun; mLiceu)
A relic of bygone Barcelona, in the shape of a dusty philatelic and coin market.
TALLER DE MARIONETAS TRAVIMARIONETTES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 412 66 92; www.marionetastravi.com; Carrer de n’Amargós 4; hnoon-9pm Mon-Sat; mUrquinaona)
Opened in the 1970s, this atmospheric shop sells beautifully handcrafted marionettes. Don Quixote, Sancho Panza and other iconic Spanish figures are on hand, as well as unusual works from other parts of the world – including rare Sicilian puppets and pieces from Myanmar (Burma), Indonesia and elsewhere.
CÓMPLICESBOOKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 412 72 83; www.libreriacomplices.com; Carrer de Cervantes 4; h10.30am-8pm Mon-Fri, from noon Sat; mJaume I)
One of the most extensive gay and lesbian bookstores in the city has a mix of erotica in the form of DVDs and comics as well as books. It’s a welcoming place for all ages and orientations.
LA MANUAL ALPARGATERASHOES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 01 72; www.lamanualalpargatera.es; Carrer d’Avinyó 7; h9.30am-1.30pm & 4.30-8pm Mon-Fri, from 10am Sat; mLiceu)
Clients from Salvador Dalí to Jean Paul Gaultier have ordered a pair of espadrilles (rope-soled canvas shoes) from this famous store. The shop was founded just after the Spanish Civil War, though the roots of the simple shoe design date back hundreds of years and originated in the Catalan Pyrenees.
SALA PARÉSARTS & CRAFTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 70 20; www.salapares.com; Carrer del Petritxol 5; h10.30am-2pm & 4-8pm Tue-Thu, to 8.30pm Fri & Sat Jun-Sep, plus 11.30am-2pm Sun Oct-May; mLiceu)
In business since 1877, this gallery has maintained its position as one of the city’s leading purveyors of Catalan art, with works from the 19th century to the present. Increasingly it stocks more work from elsewhere in Spain and Europe.
FC BOTIGAGIFTS & SOUVENIRS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 269 15 32; Carrer de Jaume I 18; h10am-9pm; mJaume I)
Need a Lionel Messi football jersey, a blue and burgundy ball, or any other football paraphernalia pertaining to what many locals consider the greatest team in the world? This is a convenient spot to load up without traipsing to the stadium.
PAPABUBBLEFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 86 25; www.papabubble.com; Carrer Ample 28; h10am-2pm & 4-8.30pm Mon-Fri, 10am-8.30pm Sat; mJaume I)
It feels like a step into another era in this sweet shop, which makes up pots of rainbow-coloured boiled lollies, just like some of us remember from corner-store days as kids. Watch the sticky sweets being made before your eyes.
PETRITXOL XOCOAFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 82 91; www.xocoa-bcn.com; Carrer del Petritxol 11-13; h9.30am-9pm; mLiceu)
Tucked along ‘chocolate street’ Carrer del Petritxol, this den of dental devilry displays ranks and ranks of original bars in stunning designs, chocolates stuffed with sweet stuff, gooey pastries and more. It has various other branches scattered about town.
OBACHFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 40 94; Carrer del Call 2; h10am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Sat Oct-Jul, 10am-2pm Mon-Sat Aug-Sep; mJaume I)
Since 1924 this store has been purveying all manner of headgear. You’ll find Kangol mohair berets, hipsterish short-brimmed hats, fedoras, elegant straw sun hats and a full-colour spectrum of barrets (berets).
LA BASILICA GALERIAJEWELLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 304 20 47; www.labasilicagaleria.com; Carrer Sant Sever 7; hnoon-9pm Mon-Sat; W; mJaume I)
A pure wonderland for the senses, La Basilica Galeria is a whimsical jewellery store with artful displays set among crystal- and flower-covered mannequins. In addition to eye-catching necklaces, delicate rings and fairy-tale pendants, there are a few original paintings for sale, though there’s more artwork a few doors down in Basilica’s gallery and perfume shop.
FIRA ALIMENTACIÓMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Plaça del Pi; h11am-9pm Fri-Sun, 1st & 3rd week of month; mLiceu)
Once a fortnight, gourmands can poke about the homemade honeys, sweets, cheeses and other edible delights at the Fira Alimentació from Friday to Sunday.
ART & CRAFTS MARKETMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Mostra d’Art; Plaça de Sant Josep Oriol; h11am-8pm Sat, to 2pm Sun; mLiceu)
The Barri Gòtic is enlivened by an art and crafts market on Saturdays and Sundays.





El Raval

Neighbourhood Top Five

4 Historical bars Partaking in a glass of cloudy absinthe while admiring some lesser-known works of Modernisme.

Local Life
AVintage shops El Raval is the epicentre of Barcelona’s fascination with all things vintage – you’ll find plenty of secondhand shops along the pedestrian Carrer de la Riera Baixa, particularly.
ASugar rush Locals swear that the best chocolate in town is to be had at Granja M Viader.
Getting There & Away
AMetro El Raval is encircled by three metro lines. Línies 1, 2 and 3 stop at strategic points around the district, so nothing is far from a metro stop. The Línia 3 stop at Liceu is a convenient exit point.
Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
For a spot of peace away from the noisy El Raval streets, head for the garden at the Antic Hospital de la Santa Creu, where you’ll find a giant chessboard.
5 Best Places to Eat
ABar Pinotxo
ACaravelle
ASuculent
AElisabets
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
ABar La Concha
ACasa Almirall
ALa Confitería
ANegroni
For reviews, see here.
1 Best Gift Shops
ALes Topettes
AFantastik
ATeranyina
For reviews, see here.




1SIGHTS

INSTITUT D’ESTUDIS CATALANSCOLLEGE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Institute for Catalan Studies; %93 270 16 20; www.iec.cat; Carrer del Carme 47; h8am-8pm Mon-Fri Sep-Jul; mLiceu)
The Institute for Catalan Studies sits in the 17th-century Casa de Convalescència, once part of the hospital that formed this complex.


5EATING

SÉSAMOVEGETARIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 441 64 11; Carrer de Sant Antoni Abat 52; mains €9-13; h7pm-midnight Tue-Sun; Wv; mSant Antoni)
Widely held to be the best veggie restaurant in the city (admittedly not as great an accolade as it might be elsewhere), Sésamo is a cosy, fun place. The menu is mainly tapas, and most people go for the seven-course tapas menu (€25, wine included), but there are a few more substantial dishes. Nice touches include the home-baked bread and cakes.
CARAVELLEINTERNATIONAL€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 98 92; www.caravelle.es; Carrer del Pintor Fortuny 31; mains €10-13; h9.30am-5pm Mon, 9.30am-midnight Tue-Thu, 10am-1am Fri & Sat, 10am-5pm Sun; mLiceu)
A bright little joint, beloved of the hipster element of El Raval and anyone with a discerning palate. It dishes up tacos as you’ve never tasted them (cod, lime aioli and radish, and pulled pork with roast corn and avocado), a superior steak sandwich on homemade brioche with pickled celeriac, and all manner of soul food.
Drinks are every bit as inventive – try the homemade ginger beer or grapefruit soda.
BAR MUY BUENASCATALAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 807 28 57; Carrer del Carme 63; mains €9-13; h1-3.30pm & 8-11pm Sun-Thu, 1-4pm & 8-11.30pm Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
After a couple of years in the doldrums, the Modernista classic Muy Buenas, which has been a bar since 1924, is back on its feet and under new ownership. Its stunning and sinuous century-old woodwork has been meticulously restored, as have its etched-glass windows and marble bar. These days it’s more restaurant than bar, though the cocktails are impressive.
Though the kitchen (which turns out traditional Catalan dishes) is only open during the listed hours, Muy Buenas is open all day, until 2am (later on Friday and Saturday nights). From Monday to Friday it offers a two-course menú del día for €13.
BAR KASPAROCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 20 72; www.kasparo.es; Plaça de Vicenç Martorell 4; mains €7-11; h9am-11pm Tue-Sat, to midnight Jun-Sep; W; mCatalunya)
This friendly outdoor cafe, which overlooks a traffic-free square with a playground, is a favourite with the neighbourhood parents and serves juices, tapas and salads, as well as more substantial dishes from around the globe.
ELISABETSCATALAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 58 26; Carrer d’Elisabets 2-4; mains €8-10; h7.30am-11.30pm Mon-Thu & Sat, to 1.30am Fri Sep-Jul; mCatalunya)
A great old neighbourhood restaurant, its walls dotted with old radio sets, Elisabets is known for its unpretentious, good-value cooking. The menú del día (€12) changes daily, but if you prefer a la carta, try the ragú de jabalí (wild boar stew) and finish with mel i mató (Catalan dessert made from cheese and honey).
EL COLECTIVOCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 63 80; Carrer del Pintor Fortuny 22; bocadillos from €4; h9am-8.30pm Mon-Sat, 9am-4pm Sun; W; mCatalunya)
A relaxed little cafe on a quiet Raval street, El Colectivo makes excellent cake (carrot, pineapple and many more), creative bocadillos (filled rolls) and excellent coffee. It’s minimal, with a single row of wooden tables, and the shop-window seating is perfect for street watching, with some good jazz playing in the background. Tapas are served on Thursdays and Fridays.
oBAR PINOTXOTAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 17 31; www.pinotxobar.com; Mercat de la Boqueria; mains €9-17; h7am-4pm Mon-Sat; mLiceu)
Bar Pinotxo is arguably La Boqueria’s, and even Barcelona’s, best tapas bar. The ever-charming owner, Juanito, might serve up chickpeas with pine nuts and raisins, a soft mix of potato and spinach sprinkled with salt, soft baby squid with cannellini beans, or a quivering cube of caramel-sweet pork belly.
EL QUIMTAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 98 10; www.elquimdelaboqueria.com; Mercat de la Boqueria; mains €16-21; hnoon-4pm Mon, 7am-4pm Tue-Thu, 7am-5pm Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
This classic counter bar in the Mercat de la Boqueria is ideal for trying traditional Catalan dishes such as fried eggs with baby squid (the house speciality) or escalivada (smoky grilled vegetables). Daily specials are prepared using whatever is in season, and might include artichoke chips or sautéed wild mushrooms.
CAN LLUÍSCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 441 11 87; www.restaurantcanlluis.cat; Carrer de la Cera 49; mains €14-16; h1.30-4pm & 8.30-11.30pm Mon-Sat; mSant Antoni)
Three generations have kept this spick-and-span old-time classic in business since 1929. Beneath the olive-green beams in the back dining room you can see the spot where an anarchist’s bomb went off in 1946, killing the then owner. The restaurant is still going strong, however, with excellent seafood dishes and a good menú del día for €10.90.
GATSFUSION€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 144 00 44; www.encompaniadelobos.com; Carrer d’en Xuclà 7; mains €9-19; hnoon-midnight; W; mLiceu)
A relatively recent addition to the barri, Gats has been an instant hit, and its terrace is constantly full. A deliciously fresh spread of dishes ranges from baba ganoush to Thai green curry, but there’s plenty here that’s local – try the ‘mountain paella’ with sausage, or the smoked sardines with honey and truffle. The kitchen is open all day.
FLAX & KALEVEGETARIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 56 64; www.teresacarles.com; Carrer dels Tallers 74; mains €13-18; h9.30am-11.30pm Mon-Fri, from 10am Sat & Sun; Wv; mUniversitat)
A far cry from the veggie restaurants of old, Flax & Kale marks a new approach (for Barcelona, at least) that declares that going meat-free does not mean giving up on choice, creativity or style. There are gluten-free and vegan options, and dishes include tacos with guacamole, aubergine and sour cashew cream, or Penang red curry.
BAR CAÑETETAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 270 34 58; www.barcanete.com; Carrer de la Uniò 17; tapas from €4.50; h1pm-midnight Mon-Sat; W; mLiceu)
Part of a trend in creating upmarket versions of traditional bars with food to match. A long, narrow dining room holds an open kitchen along which runs a wooden bar, where diners sit – from here, they can point at what they want or order from a long list of classic tapas and platillos (plates for sharing).
Many of the choices (such as the mussels with a citric dressing) have a modern twist.
EN VILLEFRENCH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 302 84 67; www.envillebarcelona.es; Carrer del Doctor Dou 14; mains €14-18; h1-4pm & 8-11.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-4pm Sun & Mon; mUniversitat)
You’ll want to come here for the divine decor – the dramatic bouquets, the oil paintings and the antique details all around – as much as the food, which is mostly, but not always, Spanish, and is entirely gluten-free. Turn up early for lunch to beat the queues.
RESTAURANT EL CAFETÍCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 329 24 19; www.elcafeti.com; Carrer de Sant Rafael 18; mains €12-18; h1.30-4pm & 8-11pm Tue-Sat, 1.30-4pm Sun; W; mLiceu)
This diminutive and atmospheric little place is filled with antique furniture and offers traditional local cooking, with one or two unorthodox variations. A more recent addition is tapas, but paella and other rice dishes dominate, and there is a good menú del día (€11). The entrance is down the narrow alleyway of Passatge de Bernardí Martorell.
SUCULENTCATALAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 443 65 79; www.suculent.com; Rambla del Raval 43; tasting menus €45-75; h1-4pm & 8-11.30pm Wed-Sun; W; mLiceu)
Celebrity chef Carles Abellan adds to his stable with this old-style bistro, which showcases the best of Catalan cuisine. From the cod brandade to the oxtail stew with truffled sweet potato, only the best ingredients are used. There is no à la carte, just four different tasting menus to choose from.
The Taverna del Suculent next door is nowadays more of a cocktail bar, but still offers updated versions of traditional tapas.
2Neighbourhood Walk
Modernista Wining & Dining in El Raval

START CASA ALMIRALL
END LA CONFITERÍA
LENGTH 2KM; ONE HOUR
Long run by the Almirall family that opened it in the mid-19th century, the corner tavern 1Casa Almirall on Carrer de Joaquín Costa preserves much of its Modernista decor, especially in the picture windows opening on to the street, and the counter and display cabinet.
You’ll recognise similarly sinuous curves as you enter the 2Bar Muy Buenas on Carrer del Carme. Opened as a milk bar in the late 19th century, it retains much of its original decoration. It’s a welcoming, cosy place for lunch or a drink.
The 3Mercat de la Boqueria, with half a dozen or so unassuming places to eat, dates back to the 13th century, but it wasn’t until 1840 that it was officially inaugurated on this site. In 1914 it was capped with a metal roof and given its charming, wrought-iron, Modernista entrance sign, which is inset with colourful stained glass.
The 4Hotel España is known above all for its dining rooms, part of the 1903 design by Domènech i Montaner. The Sala Arnau (Arnau Room) features a magnificent alabaster fireplace designed by Eusebi Arnau. Moderately priced traditional Catalan fare is served.
While wandering around El Raval you should not miss 5Palau Güell, one of Gaudí’s earlier big commissions. Not designed in his conventional Modernista style, it nonetheless has unmistakeable Gaudí touches, such as the smashed tile chimneys on the rooftop terrace. If passing by at night while doing a round of the bars, make a note to return here by day.
On Carrer de Sant Pau, walk south past the Romanesque church to 6La Confitería, once a barber’s shop and then a long-time confectioner’s. It was lovingly restored for its reconversion into a bar in 1998. Most of the elements in the front section, including facade, bar counter and cabinets, are the real deal. The back room has been completely renovated more recently, but the style is sympathetic.
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

oLA CONFITERÍABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 140 54 35; Carrer de Sant Pau 128; h7pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, 6pm-3am Fri & Sat, 5pm-2.30am Sun; W; mParal·lel)
This is a trip into the 19th century. Until the 1980s it was a confectioner’s shop, and although the original cabinets are now lined with booze, the look of the place barely changed with its conversion. A recent refurb of the back room is similarly sympathetic, and the vibe these days is lively cocktail bar.
Later in the evening, it fills with those falling out of the nearby BARTS and Sala Apolo concert halls.
CASA ALMIRALLBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 95 92; www.casaalmirall.com; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 33; h5.30pm-2am Mon-Wed, noon-2.30am Thu-Sat, noon-12.30am Sun; W; mUniversitat)
In business since the 1860s, this unchanged corner bar is dark and intriguing, with Modernista decor and a mixed clientele. There are some great original pieces in here, such as the marble counter, and the cast-iron statue of the muse of the Universal Exposition, held in Barcelona in 1888.
BAR PASTÍSBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.barpastis.es; Carrer de Santa Mònica 4; h8pm-2am Tue-Thu & Sun, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mDrassanes)
A French cabaret theme (with lots of Piaf on the stereo) pervades this tiny, cluttered classic, which has been going, on and off, since the end of WWII. You’ll need to be in before 9pm to have any hope of sitting or getting near the bar. On some nights it features live acts, usually performing French chanson.
BAR MARSELLABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 442 72 63; Carrer de Sant Pau 65; h10pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mLiceu)
Bar Marsella has been in business since 1820, and has served the likes of Hemingway, who was known to slump here over an absenta (absinthe). The bar still specialises in absinthe, a drink to be treated with respect.
Your absinthe glass comes with a lump of sugar, a fork and a little bottle of mineral water. Hold the sugar on the fork, over your glass, and drip the water onto the sugar so that it dissolves into the absinthe, which turns yellow. The result should give you a warm glow.
GRANJA M VIADERCAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 318 34 86; www.granjaviader.cat; Carrer d’en Xuclà 6; h9am-1pm & 5-9pm Mon-Sat; mLiceu)
For more than a century, people have been coming here for hot chocolate with whipped cream (ask for a suís) ladled out in this classically Catalan milk bar. In 1931, the Viader clan invented Cacaolat, a bottled chocolate milk drink, with iconic label design. The interior here is delightfully old-fashioned and the atmosphere always lively.
EL DRAPAIREBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %607 466446; www.drapaire.com; Carrer de les Sitges 11; h6pm-2am Sun-Thu, 3pm-3am Fri & Sat; W; mCatalunya)
Part of the recent explosion in the craft-beer scene, this cosy, beamed tavern has been given a new lease on life and now has 13 taps, featuring Spanish and international beers of all styles. There are tapas and platters of cheese and charcuterie to share. Live music on Fridays.
33|45BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 187 41 38; www.3345.struments.com; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 4; h1pm-2am Sun-Mon, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mUniversitat)
A super-trendy bar on a street that’s not short of them, this place has excellent mojitos, a fashionable crowd and a frequently changing exhibition of art on the walls. There are DJs most nights, along with plenty of sofas and armchairs for a post-dancing slump.
MOOGCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 17 89; www.masimas.com/moog; Carrer de l’Arc del Teatre 3; entry €5-10; hmidnight-5am Sun-Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat; mDrassanes)
This fun and minuscule club is a standing favourite with the downtown crowd. In the main dance area DJs dish out house, techno and electro, while upstairs you can groove to a nice blend of indie and occasional classic-pop throwbacks.
NEGRONICOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.negronicocktailbar.com; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 46; h7pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mUniversitat)
Good things come in small packages and this dark, teeny cocktail bar confirms the rule. The mostly black decor lures in a largely student set to try out the cocktails, among them, of course, the celebrated Negroni, a Florentine invention with one part Campari, one part gin and one part sweet vermouth.
MARMALADEBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 442 39 66; www.marmaladebarcelona.com; Carrer de la Riera Alta 4-6; h6.30pm-2am Mon-Thu, 10am-3am Fri-Sun; W; mSant Antoni)
The golden hues of this backlit bar and restaurant beckon seductively through the glass facade. There are various distinct spaces, decorated in different but equally sumptuous styles, and a pool table next to the bar. Cocktails are big business here, and a selection of them are €5 all night.
BAR LA CONCHABAR, GAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.laconchadelraval.com; Carrer de la Guàrdia 14; h5pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mDrassanes)
This place is dedicated to the actress Sara Montiel: the walls groan with more than 250 photos of the sultry star, now surrounding an incongruous large-screen TV. La Concha used to be a largely gay and transvestite haunt, but anyone is welcome and bound to have fun – especially when the drag queens come out to play.
Born in 1928, Sara Montiel bared all on the silver screen in an era that condemned nudity to shameful brazenness – hence ‘la concha’ (a word commonly used in Spanish slang) can be read as a sly salute to the female genitalia.
BETTY FORD’SBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 304 13 68; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 56; h1pm-2.30am Tue-Sat, from 5pm Sun & Mon; W; mUniversitat)
This enticing corner bar is one of several good stops along the student-jammed run of Carrer de Joaquín Costa. It puts together some nice cocktails and the place fills with an even mix of locals and foreigners, generally aged not much over 30. There’s a decent line in burgers and soups, too.
KENTUCKYBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer de l’Arc del Teatre 11; h10pm-4am Wed-Sat; mDrassanes)
Once a haunt of visiting US Navy boys, this exercise in Americana kitsch is the perfect way to finish an evening – if you can squeeze in. All sorts of odd bods from the barri and beyond gather here. An institution in the wee hours, Kentucky often stays open (unofficially) until dawn.
HISTORICAL RAVAL BARS

ABar Marsella
ALa Confitería
ACasa Almirall
3ENTERTAINMENT

23 ROBADORSLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.23robadors.wordpress.com; Carrer d’en Robador 23; h8pm-2.30am; mLiceu)
On what remains a sleazy Raval street, where streetwalkers, junkies and other misfits hang out in spite of all the work being done to gentrify the area, this narrow little bar has made a name for itself with its shows and live music. Jazz is the name of the game, but you’ll also find live poetry, flamenco and plenty more.
JAZZ SÍ CLUBLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 329 00 20; www.tallerdemusics.com/en/jazzsi-club; Carrer de Requesens 2; entry incl drink €6-10; h8.30-11pm Tue-Sat, 6.30-10pm Sun; mSant Antoni)
A cramped little bar run by the Taller de Músics (Musicians’ Workshop) serves as the stage for a varied program of jazz jams through to some good flamenco (Friday and Saturday nights). Thursday night is Cuban night, Tuesday and Sunday are rock, and the rest are devoted to jazz and/or blues sessions. Concerts start around 9pm but the jam sessions can get going earlier.
TEATRE LLANTIOLTHEATRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 329 90 09; www.llantiol.com; Carrer de la Riereta 7; mSant Antoni)
At this small, charming cafe-theatre, which has a certain scuffed elegance, all sorts of odd stuff, from concerts and theatre to magic shows, is staged. The speciality, though, is stand-up comedy, which is occasionally in English (Eddie Izzard did his recent Barcelona run of gigs here). Check the website for details.
TEATRE ROMEATHEATRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 309 70 04; www.teatreromea.com; Carrer de l’Hospital 51; hbox office 5.30pm to start of show Tue-Fri, from 4.30pm Sat & Sun; mLiceu)
Just off La Rambla, this 19th-century theatre was resurrected at the end of the 1990s and is one of the city’s key stages for quality drama. It usually fills up for a broad range of interesting plays, often classics with a contemporary flavour, in Catalan and Spanish.
EL CANGREJOGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 29 78; Carrer de Montserrat 9; h11pm-3am Fri & Sat; mDrassanes)
This altar to kitsch is a dingy dance hall that has transgressed since the 1920s, and for years starred the luminous underground cabaret figure of Carmen Mairena. It exudes a gorgeously tacky feel, especially with the midnight drag shows. Due to its popularity with tourists, getting in is all but impossible unless you turn up early.


7 SHOPPING

oLES TOPETTESCOSMETICS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 500 55 64; www.lestopettes.com; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 33; h11am-2pm & 4-9pm Tue-Sat, 4-9pm Mon; mUniversitat)
It’s a sign of the times that such a chic little temple to soap and perfume can exist in El Raval. The items in Les Topettes’ collection have been picked for their designs as much as for the products themselves, and you’ll find gorgeously packaged scents, candles and unguents from Diptyque, Cowshed and L’Artisan Parfumeur, among others.
FANTASTIKARTS & CRAFTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 30 68; www.fantastik.es; Carrer de Joaquín Costa 62; h11am-2pm & 4-8.30pm Mon-Fri, 11am-3pm & 4-9pm Sat; mUniversitat)
Over 400 products, including a Mexican skull rattle, robot moon explorer from China and recycled plastic zebras from South Africa, are to be found in this colourful shop, which sources its items from Mexico, India, Bulgaria, Russia, Senegal and 20 other countries. It’s a perfect place to buy all the things you don’t need but can’t live without.
HOLALA! PLAZAFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.holala-ibiza.com; Plaça de Castella 2; h11am-9pm Mon-Sat; mUniversitat)
Backing on to Carrer de Valldonzella, where it boasts an exhibition space (Gallery) for temporary art displays, this Ibiza import is inspired by that island’s long-established (and somewhat commercialised) hippie tradition. Vintage clothes are the name of the game, along with an eclectic program of exhibitions and activities.
CHÖKFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 304 23 60; www.chokbarcelona.com; Carrer del Carme 3; h9am-9pm; mLiceu)
Set inside an old chocolate-maker’s, with original wooden shelving and stained glass, Chök now specialises in all things sweet, but especially doughnuts. These come in a huge array of colours and flavours, but there are also cookies, macarons, marshmallows and, of course, the ubiquitous cronut. There’s a tiny space where you can order and drink coffee.
TERANYINAARTS & CRAFTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 94 36; www.textilteranyina.com; Carrer del Notariat 10; h11am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri; mCatalunya)
Artist Teresa Rosa Aguayo runs this textile workshop in the heart of the artsy bit of El Raval. You can join courses at the loom, admire some of the rugs and other works that Teresa has created, and, of course, buy them.
LA PORTORRIQUEÑACOFFEE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 34 38; Carrer d’en Xuclà 25; h9am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri, 9am-2pm Sat; mCatalunya)
Coffee beans from around the world, freshly ground before your eyes, have been the winning formula in this store since 1902. It also offers all sorts of chocolate goodies. The street it’s on is good for little old-fashioned food boutiques.





La Ribera

Neighbourhood Top Five

4 Parc de la Ciutadella Enjoying a stroll, having a picnic, taking a boat out on the lake and spotting the art works.
5 Bormuth Tucking into old-school tapas in a lively atmosphere, and making the most of the excellent lunch deal.

5 Best Places to Eat
ACasa Delfín
AEl Atril
ANakashita
ABormuth
AEn Aparté
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
AMudanzas
ALa Vinya del Senyor 
ARubí
AMiramelindo
For reviews, see here.



1SIGHTS
PARC DE LA CIUTADELLAPARK
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Passeig de Picasso; h8am-9pm May-Sep, to 7pm Oct-Apr; c; mArc de Triomf)
Come for a stroll, a picnic, a boat ride on the lake or to inspect Catalonia’s parliament, but don’t miss a visit to this, the most central green lung in the city. Parc de la Ciutadella is perfect for winding down.
After the War of the Spanish Succession, Felipe V razed a swath of La Ribera to build a huge fortress (La Ciutadella), designed to keep watch over Barcelona. It became a symbol of everything Catalans hated about Madrid and the Bourbon kings, and was later used as a political prison. Only in 1869 did the central government allow its demolition, after which the site was turned into a park and used for the Universal Exhibition of 1888.
The monumental cascada MAP GOOGLE MAP; (waterfall) near the Passeig de Pujades park entrance, created between 1875 and 1881 by Josep Fontserè with the help of an enthusiastic young Gaudí, is a dramatic combination of statuary, rugged rocks, greenery and thundering water – all of it perfectly artificial. Nearby you can hire a rowing boat to paddle about in the small lake.
To the southeast, in what might be seen as an exercise in black humour, the fort’s former arsenal now houses the Parlament de Catalunya MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 304 65 00; www.parlament.cat; hguided tours 10am-1pm Sat, Sun & holidays) F. You can join free guided tours, in Catalan and Spanish only, on Saturdays and Sundays. The building is only open for independent visiting on 11 September from 10am to 7pm. On show to the public are the sweeping Escala d’Honor (Stairway of Honour) and the several solemn halls that lead to the Saló de Sessions, the semicircular auditorium where parliament sits. In the lily pond at the centre of the garden in front of the building is a statue of a seemingly heartbroken woman, Desconsol (Distress; 1907), by Josep Llimona.
The Passeig de Picasso side of the park is lined with several buildings constructed for, or just before, the Universal Exhibition. The medieval-looking caprice at the top end is the most engaging. Known as the Castell dels Tres Dragons MAP GOOGLE MAP; (Castle of the Three Dragons), it long housed the Museu de Zoologia, which has since moved to the Fòrum area and is now known as the Museu Blau. Domènech i Montaner put the ‘castle’s’ trimmings on a pioneering steel frame. The coats of arms are all invented and the whole building exudes a teasing, playful air. It was used as a cafe-restaurant during the Universal Exhibition.
To the south is L’Hivernacle, an elaborate greenhouse. Next come the former Museu de Geologia and L’Umbracle, a palm house. On Passeig de Picasso itself is Antoni Tàpies’ typically impenetrable Homenatge a Picasso MAP GOOGLE MAP;. Water runs down the panes of a glass box full of bits of old furniture and steel girders.
Northwest of the park, Passeig de Lluís Companys is capped by the Modernista Arc de Triomf MAP GOOGLE MAP, designed by Josep Vilaseca as the principal exhibition entrance, with unusual, Mudéjar-style brickwork. Josep Llimona did the main reliefs. Just what the triumph was eludes us, especially since the exhibition itself was a commercial failure. It is perhaps best thought of as a bricks-and-mortar embodiment of the city’s general fin de siècle feel-good factor.

MONESTIR DE SANT PERE DE LES PUELLESCHURCH
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 07 42; www.parroquiasantpere.org; Carrer de Lluís el Piadós 1; h9am-1pm & 5-7.45pm Mon-Fri, 9am-1pm & 4.30-6.45pm Sat, 11am-1.15pm Sun; mArc de Triomf) F
It was around this church that settlement began in La Ribera. In AD 985 a Muslim raiding force under Al-Mansur attacked Barcelona and largely destroyed what was then a convent, killing or capturing the nuns. It was rebuilt in early medieval times, but not a great deal remains. The church’s pre-Romanesque Greek-cross floor plan survives, as do some Corinthian columns, beneath the 12th-century dome, and a much-damaged Renaissance vault leading into a side chapel.
ZOO DE BARCELONAZOO
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %902 457545; www.zoobarcelona.cat; Parc de la Ciutadella; adult/concession/child under 3yr €20/12/free; h10am-5.30pm Nov-Mar, 10am-7pm Apr, May, Sep & Oct, 10am-8pm Jun-Aug; c; mBarceloneta)
The zoo is a great day out for kids, with 7500 critters that range from geckos to gorillas, lions and elephants – there are more than 400 species, plus picnic areas dotted all around and a wonderful adventure playground. There are pony rides, a petting zoo and a minitrain meandering through the grounds. Thanks to recent advances in legislation prohibiting the use of animals for performances (including circuses and bullfighting) the zoo called time on its dolphin shows in late 2015.
There is a 20% discount if you book online.
FUNDACIÓ FOTO COLECTANIAGALLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 16 26; www.colectania.es; Passeig de Picasso 14; adult/concession/child under 14yr €4/3/free, free 1st Sun of month; h11am-8pm Mon-Sat, 11am-3pm Sun; mArc de Triomf, Jaume I)
Photography lovers should swing by here to see the latest exhibition from this nonprofit foundation, which showcases thought-provoking works from across the globe. In 2016 the foundation moved from its base in Gràcia to this 500-sq-metre space in El Born. The exhibits may come from the foundation’s extensive 3000-piece collection of Spanish and Portuguese photographers from the 1950s onwards, but more likely will be temporary exhibitions.
CASA DE LA SEDAHISTORIC BUILDING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 77 78; www.casadelaseda.com; Carrer de Sant Pere més Alt 1; adult/concession/child under 11yr €10/8/free; h11am Sat guided tour in English/Spanish/Catalan; mUrquinaona)
The former headquarters of the Silk Sailmakers’ Guild, a handsome 18th-century mansion covered in caryatid sgraffiti that sits on the Via Laietana, is now open to the public. Obligatory guided tours are in English, Spanish and Catalan, last 45 minutes and take in rooms including the luxuriously appointed guild hall, meeting rooms and library.
EL FOSSAR DE LES MORERESSQUARE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; mJaume I)
Opposite Basílica de Santa Maria del Mar’s eastern flank, an eternal flame burns brightly over an apparently anonymous sunken square. This is El Fossar de les Moreres (Mulberry Cemetery), the site of a Roman cemetery. It’s also where Catalan resistance fighters were buried after the siege of Barcelona ended in defeat in September 1714, and for whom the flame burns.

ARXIU FOTOGRÀFIC DE BARCELONAGALLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 34 20; http://arxiufotografic.bcn.cat; Plaça de Pons i Clerch 2, 2A; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat; mArc de Triomf) F
On the 2nd floor of the former Convent de Sant Agustí is the modest exhibition space of this photo archive. Photos on show are generally related to the city, as the photo collection is principally devoted to that theme, from the late 19th century until the late 20th century.
CASA LLOTJA DE MARARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; La Llotja; %93 547 88 49; www.casallotja.com; Passeig d’Isabel II 1; h10am-2pm Mon-Fri; mBarceloneta) F
The centrepiece of the city’s medieval stock exchange (more affectionately known as La Llotja) is the fine Gothic Saló de Contractacions (Transaction Hall), built in the 14th century. Pablo Picasso and Joan Miró attended the art school that was housed in the Saló dels Cònsols from 1849.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
SQUARING UP TO THE PAST

Antonio López y López was an entrepreneur and philanthropist, whose generosity funded the construction of most of the buildings at the port-end of the Via Laietana, where a square now bears his name (and a large statue). In recent years, it’s emerged that some of his money was made from the slave trade, and there is a move to rename the square after Nelson Mandela, among other proposals.
The council is dragging its heels, however, so in the meantime, activists have covered the street sign with a plaque reading ‘Plaça de Idrissa Diallo’, named for a young Guinean immigrant who died in a local detention centre in 2012.
5EATING

PARADISO/PASTRAMI BARSMOKERY, COCKTAIL BAR€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %639 310671; www.rooftopsmokehouse.com; Carrer de Rera Palau 4; mains €7-9; h7pm-2am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mBarceloneta)
A kind of Narnia-in-reverse, Paradiso is fronted with a snowy-white space, not much bigger than a wardrobe, with pastrami sandwiches, pulled pork and other home-cured delights. But this is only the portal – pull open the huge wooden fridge door, and step through into a glam, sexy speakeasy of a cocktail bar guaranteed to raise the most world-weary of eyebrows.
EUSKAL ETXEATAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 21 85; www.euskaletxeataberna.com; Placeta de Montcada 1; tapas €2.10; h10am-12.30am Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
Barcelona has plenty of Basque and pseudo-Basque tapas bars, but this is the real deal. It captures the feel of San Sebastián better than many of its newer competitors. Choose your pintxos (Basque tapas piled on slices of bread), sip txakoli (Basque white wine), and keep the toothpicks so the staff can count them up and work out your bill.
BORMUTHTAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 21 86; Carrer del Rec 31; tapas €4-10; hnoon-1.30am Sun-Thu, to 2.30am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
Bormuth has tapped into the vogue for old-school tapas with modern-day service and decor, and serves all the old favourites – patatas bravas (potatoes in a spicy tomato sauce), ensaladilla (Russian salad) and tortilla – along with some less predictable and superbly prepared numbers (try the chargrilled red pepper with black pudding).
KOKU KITCHEN BUNSASIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 269 65 36; www.kokukitchen.es; Carrer del Comerç 29; mains €9-11; h1-4pm & 7.30-11.30pm; W; mBarceloneta)
Steamed buns stuffed with beef or pork with coriander, peanuts, pickled fennel and a sake sauce are the big draw here, but the starters, sides and even the excellent home-made lemonade are also worthy of note, as is the list of inventive cocktails. A great-value lunch menú del día is €13.
EL CASALMODERN FRENCH€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 40 04; www.elcasalcafe.com; Plaça Victor Balaguer 5; menú del día €12, sandwiches €3.50-4.50; h7am-5pm Mon-Wed, 6pm-midnight Thu-Sat; mJaume I)
A French-run cafe serving excellent food for a great price in noisy but welcoming surroundings, adorned with objets from the motherland. The fixed lunch changes daily, but look out for the superior cauliflower cheese and an authentic tarte Tatin. Breakfast is available until 1pm, and tapas and sandwiches are available throughout the day. Arrive early for a terrace table.
ROCKATAARGENTINE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 181 90 42; www.rockatabarcelona.com; Carrer del Comerç 20; mains €8-€9; h11.30am-11.30pm; W; mArc de Triomf)
Not much more than a corridor with a kitchen, Rockata is the 2017 incarnation of a laksa bar, and has maintained a bowl of it (prawn, since you ask) on the menu, but otherwise the Argentine running the joint has returned to his roots – expect lots of grilled meats and burgers, and a long list of hearty sandwiches.
CAT BARVEGAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.catbarcat.com; Carrer de la Bòria 17; mains €6-9; h1-10pm Thu-Mon; Wv; mJaume I)
This tiny little joint squeezes in a vegan kitchen, a great selection of local artisanal beers and a smattering of live music. The food mostly centres on a list of different burgers, plus a gluten-free dish of the day, tapas and hummus. The beers change regularly, but there is always one wheat, one porter, one gluten-free and an IPA.
EN APARTÉFRENCH€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 269 13 35; www.enaparte.es; Carrer de Lluís el Piadós 2; mains €8-13; h10am-1am Mon-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat, to 12.30am Sun; W; mArc de Triomf)
A great low-key place to eat good-quality French food, just off the quiet Plaça de Sant Pere. The restaurant is small but spacious, with sewing-machine tables and vintage details, and floor-to-ceiling windows that bring in some wonderful early-afternoon sunlight.
TANTARANTANAMEDITERRANEAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 24 10; www.gruposantelmo.com; Carrer d’en Tantarantana 24; mains €9-12; h1pm-midnight; W; mJaume I)
There is something comforting about the old-style marble-top tables, upon which you can try simple but well-prepared dishes such as wild-mushroom risotto or cod with ratatouille. There’s also a long list of tapas. Tantarantana attracts a thirty-something crowd who make the most of the outdoor seating in warmer months.
LA LLAVOR DELS ORÍGENSCATALAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 75 31; www.lallavordelsorigens.com; Carrer de la Vidrieria 6-8; mains €9-15; h1-5pm & 7pm-midnight Mon-Thu, 1pm-midnight Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
In this treasure chest of Catalan regional products, the shop shelves groan under the weight of bottles. It also has a long menu of smallish dishes, such as sopa de carbassa i castanyes (pumpkin and chestnut soup) or mandonguilles amb albergìnies (rissoles with aubergine), which you can mix and match over wine by the glass.
oEL ATRILINTERNATIONAL€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 12 20; www.elatrilbarcelona.es; Carrer dels Carders 23; mains €11-18; h11am-11.30pm Sun-Thu, to midnight Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
El Atril is influenced by culinary flavours from all over the globe, so while you’ll see plenty of tapas (the patatas bravas are recommended), you’ll also find kangaroo fillet, moules-frites (mussels and fries), duck cannelloni, and a good selection of substantial salads. There’s also a mix of meats you can cook yourself on a salt block (€19, minimum two people).
oCASA DELFÍNCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 50 88; www.facebook.com/Casa-Delfin-326525620764565/; Passeig del Born 36; mains €10-17; h8am-midnight Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
One of Barcelona’s culinary delights, Casa Delfín is everything you dream of when you think of Catalan (and Mediterranean) cooking. Start with the tangy and sweet calçots (spring onions; February and March only) or salt-strewn Padrón peppers, moving on to grilled sardines speckled with parsley, then tackle the meaty monkfish roasted in white wine and garlic.
NAKASHITAJAPANESE€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 295 53 78; www.nakashitabcn.com; Carrer del Rec Comtal 15; mains €12-22; h1.30-4pm & 8.30pm-midnight Mon-Sun; W; mArc de Triomf)
Brazil’s particular immigration story means it has a tradition of superb Japanese food, and the Brazilian chef at Nakashita is no slouch, turning out excellent sashimi, maki rolls, softshell crab and kakiage (a mix of tempura). One of the best Japanese restaurants in the city, with just a handful of tables – book if you can.
BAR DEL PLATAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 30 03; www.bardelpla.cat; Carrer de Montcada 2; mains €12-16; hnoon-11pm Mon-Thu, to midnight Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
A bright and occasionally rowdy place, with glorious Catalan tiling, a vaulted ceiling and bottles of wine lining the walls. At first glance, the tapas at informal Bar del Pla are traditionally Spanish, but the riffs on a theme display an assured touch. Try the ham croquettes, Wagyu burger, T-bone steak or marinated salmon, yoghurt and mustard.
CAL PEPTAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 79 61; www.calpep.com; Plaça de les Olles 8; mains €13-20; h7.30-11.30pm Mon, 1-3.45pm & 7.30-11.30pm Tue-Sat, closed last 3 weeks Aug; mBarceloneta)
It’s getting a foot in the door of this legendary fish restaurant that’s the problem – there can be queues out into the square. And if you want one of the five tables out the back, you’ll need to call ahead. Most people are happy elbowing their way to the bar for some of the tastiest seafood tapas in town.
GINETTEFRENCH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 280 95 03; www.ginette.es; Carrer del Rec Comtal 12; mains €16-18; h8.30am-2am Tue-Sun Sep-Jun, 6pm-2am Mon-Sat Jul & Aug; mArc de Triomf)
Opened in 2017, with a Parisian chef at the helm, Ginette blends Scandinavian and Barcelona chic in its decor, but the menu has an overwhelmingly Gallic feel, with dishes such as cod meunière with hazelnuts or duck magret with orange. There are also tapas – and even these include a croque monsieur with Comté cheese.
EL CHIGRETAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 782 63 30; http://elchigre1769.com; Carrer dels Sombrerers 7; mains €10-17; hnoon-11.45pm, from 1pm Mon-Fri Nov-Mar; mJaume I)
Styling itself as part Asturian cider house and part Catalan vermuteria (bar specialising in vermouth, served on ice with a slice of orange and a green olive), El Chigre brings sophisticated versions of classic dishes from both regions to its menu. Try the superb tomato and tuna salad with tomato gelée, or the puffed corn tortos with lamb stew.
LE CUCINE MANDAROSSOITALIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 269 07 80; www.lecucinemandarosso.com; Carrer de Verdaguer i Callís 4; mains €12-14, menú del día €12; h1.30-4pm & 9pm-midnight Tue-Sun; mUrquinaona)
This is comfort food done to perfection – the menu changes daily, with only a handful of mains to choose from, most of which are pasta, with one or two fish or meat. The antipasti can be vegetables, or fresh cheese, such as the wonderfully creamy burrata (made from mozzarella and cream), buffalo-milk mozzarella, or smoked scamorza and provola cheese.
FARIGOLAMEDITERRANEAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 488 55 83; Carrer del Davant del Portal Nou 3; mains €6-8; h11am-1am; mArc de Triomf)
Farigola is a bit of a gem, hidden on a quiet backstreet and known only to locals. Its small terrace and cosy dining room/bar are rarely full, but its lunch deal (two dishes for €12) is good. Dishes might include roast beef with rosemary potatoes, or beetroot couscous with ricotta, or otherwise sandwiches (the pastrami is superb) are available all day.
SANTAGUSTINATAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 79 04; www.santagustina.com; Plaça Sant Agustí Vell 9; mains €9-14; hnoon-1am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mArc de Triomf)
This tapas bar–restaurant has tables outside on a charming little plaza. Invoking a slightly wicked ecclesiastical theme, with menus sectioned into ‘Blessed Tapas’, ‘Divine Tapas’, ‘Immaculate Tapas’ and ‘Temptations’, it serves up well-executed Spanish and Catalan food – oxtail stew, ‘Granny’s meatballs’, grilled octopus etc – in small portions designed for sharing. Service could be a little more attentive.
EL FOROARGENTINE€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 10 20; www.restauranteelforo.com; Carrer de la Princesa 53; mains €9-16; h11.30am-11.30pm Tue-Thu & Sun, to 12.30am Fri & Sat; Wv; mJaume I)
Friendly El Foro does everything you’d expect an Argentine restaurant to do – huge slabs of red meat in a variety of cuts, empanadas (small pasties with various fillings) and the inevitable Italian element in the shape of pizzas and pasta dishes. Less predictable is the list of vegetarian dishes (such as vegetable curry with quinoa and coconut milk) and the range of salads.
CUINES DE SANTA CATERINAMEDITERRANEAN, ASIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 99 18; www.grupotragaluz.com; Mercat de Santa Caterina; mains €12-16; h1-4pm & 7.30-11pm Sun-Thu, to 11.30pm Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
With a contemporary feel and open kitchens, this multifaceted restaurant inside the Mercat de Santa Caterina offers all sorts of food. Peck at the sushi bar, tuck into classic rice dishes or chargrilled meat, or go vegetarian. It does some things better than others (skip the hummus and tarte Tatin). Reservations aren’t taken, so you may have to queue.
2Local Life
Tapas & Bar-Hopping in El Born

If there’s one place that distils Barcelona’s enduring cool and provides a snapshot of all that’s irresistible about this city, it has to be El Born, the tangle of streets surrounding the Basílica de Santa Maria del Mar. Its secret is simple: this is where locals go for an authentic Barcelona night out.

2 Catalan Tapas

Push through the crowd to order a cava (sparkling wine) and an assortment of tapas at El Xampanyet, one of the city’s best-known cava bars, in business since 1929. Star dishes include tangy boquerones en vinagre (white anchovies in vinegar) and there’s high-quality seafood served from a can in the Catalan way.
3 Best of Basque

Having taken your first lesson in Barcelona-style tapas it’s time to compare it with the pintxos (Basque tapas of food morsels perched atop pieces of bread) lined up along the bar at Euskal Etxea.
4 Spain with a Twist

The detour to Bar del Pla on the northern limits of El Born is worth the walk. The tapas may look traditionally Spanish but a confident hand in the kitchen bestows deft touches of originality.
5 Tapas with a View

Back in the heart of El Born, in the shadow of the Basílica de Santa Maria del Mar, pastry chef Carles Mampel operates BubóMAP GOOGLE MAP (%93 268 72 24; www.bubo.es; Carrer de les Caputxes 6 & 10; tapas from €4; h10am-9pm Mon-Thu, to 11pm Fri & Sat, 10am-10pm Sun; mBarceloneta). If you’re not already sated, try the salted-cod croquettes at one of the outdoor tables inching onto the lovely square.
6 Cal Pep

Boisterous Cal Pep is one of Barcelona’s enduring stars. It can be difficult to snaffle a bar stool from which to order gourmet bar snacks such as cloïsses amb pernil (clams with ham); so if it’s full, order a drink and wait.
7 El Born’s Favourite Bar

El Born Bar effortlessly attracts everyone from cool thirty-somethings from all over town to locals who pass judgment on Passeig del Born’s passing parade. Its staying power depends on a good selection of beers, spirits, and empanadas and other snacks.
8 The Last Mojito

So many Barcelona nights end with a mojito, and El Born’s biggest and best are to be found at Cactus Bar. The outdoor tables next to Passeig del Born are the perfect way to wind down the night.

Seafood at Cal Pep | SIMON FURLONG PHOTOS/SHUTTERSTOCK ©
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

GUZZOCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 667 00 36; www.guzzoclub.es; Plaça Comercial 10; h6pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, noon-3am Sun; W; mJaume I)
This swish but relaxed cocktail bar is run by much-loved Barcelona DJ Fred Guzzo, who is often to be found at the decks, spinning his delicious selection of funk, soul and rare groove. You’ll also find frequent live-music acts of consistently decent quality, and a funky atmosphere at almost any time of day.
LA VINYA DEL SENYORWINE BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 33 79; Plaça de Santa Maria del Mar 5; hnoon-1am Mon-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat, to midnight Sun; W; mJaume I)
Relax on the terraza, which lies in the shadow of the Basílica de Santa Maria del Mar, or crowd inside at the tiny bar. The wine list is as long as War and Peace and there’s a table upstairs for those who opt to sample the wine away from the madding crowd.
BAR DEL CONVENTCAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 50 17; www.bardelconvent.com; Plaça de l’Acadèmia; h10am-9pm Tue-Sat; c; mArc de Triomf)
Alongside the Gothic arches of what remains of the Sant Agusti convent’s cloister is this pleasant cafe-bar – particularly good for people with children. Kids often play football in the cloister grounds, and there are children’s books and toys in the cafe itself. You can also enter at Carrer del Comerç 36 through James Turrell’s light sculpture.
RUBÍBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %647 737707; Carrer dels Banys Vells 6; h7.30pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mJaume I)
With its boudoir lighting and cheap mojitos, Rubí is where the Born’s cognoscenti head for a nightcap – or several. It’s a narrow, cosy space – push through to the back where you might just get one of the coveted tables, with superior bar food, from Vietnamese rolls to more traditional selections of cheese and ham.
EL BORN BARBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 53 33; www.elbornbar.com; Passeig del Born 26; h10am-2am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, noon-2.30am Sun; W; mJaume I)
Moss-green paintwork, marble tables and a chequered black-and-white tiled floor create a timeless look for this popular little cafe-bar. A spiral wrought-iron staircase leads to a quieter room upstairs (the twisting steps mean that there is no table service and hot drinks can’t be carried upstairs).
EL XAMPANYETWINE BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 70 03; Carrer de Montcada 22; hnoon-3.30pm & 7-11.15pm Tue-Sat, noon-3.30pm Sun; W; mJaume I)
Nothing has changed for decades in this, one of the city’s best-known cava (wine) bars. Plant yourself at the bar or seek out a table against the decoratively tiled walls for a glass or three of the cheap house cava and an assortment of tapas, such as the tangy boquerones en vinagre (fresh anchovies in vinegar).
MIRAMELINDOBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 37 27; www.barmiramelindobcn.com; Passeig del Born 15; h8pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, to 3.30am Fri & Sat, 7pm-2.30am Sun; W; mJaume I)
A spacious tavern in a Gothic building, this remains a classic on Passeig del Born for mixed drinks, while soft jazz and soul sounds float overhead. Try for a comfy seat at a table towards the back before it fills to bursting. A couple of similarly barn-sized places sit on this side of the passeig.
MUDANZASBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 11 37; Carrer de la Vidrieria 15; h8am-2.30am Mon-Fri, 10am-2.30am Sat & Sun; W; mJaume I)
This was one of the first bars to get things into gear in El Born and it still attracts a faithful crowd. With its chequered floor and marble-topped tables, it’s an attractive, lively place for a beer and perhaps a sandwich or a tapa. It also has a nice line in rum and malt whisky.
MAGICCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 72 67; www.magic-club.net; Passeig de Picasso 40; h11pm-6am Thu-Sat; mBarceloneta)
Although it sometimes hosts live acts in its sweaty basement, Magic is basically a straightforward, subterranean nightclub offering rock, mainstream dance faves and Spanish pop. It’s an established favourite on the scene, and queues can be long.
CACTUS BARBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 247 92 90; Passeig del Born 30; h3pm-3am; mJaume I)
A lively bar that hops until late into the night, often thanks to visiting DJs. The bar itself is tiny, but the terrace outside is a good spot, and overlooks the pretty Passeig del Born.
A MEDIEVAL CONCERT HALL

You can sip wine or cocktails (both rather expensive) inside the baroque courtyard and theatrical interior of the originally medieval Palau de Dalmases MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 310 06 73; www.palaudalmases.com; Carrer de Montcada 20; h6pm-2am Tue-Sat, 6-10pm Sun; mJaume I). There are flamenco shows at 6pm, 7.30pm and 9.30pm (€25 including one drink). On Wednesdays there is a free jazz concert at 11pm, and on Thursdays opera (€20).
3ENTERTAINMENT

TABLAO NERVIÓNDANCE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 21 03; www.restaurantenervion.com; Carrer de la Princesa 2; show incl 1 drink €18, show & set dinner €30; hshows 8-10pm Wed-Sun; mJaume I)
For admittedly tourist-oriented flamenco, this unassuming bar (shows take place in the basement) is cheaper than most, and has good offerings. Check the website for further details.
7 SHOPPING

EL REI DE LA MÀGIAMAGIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 39 20; www.elreydelamagia.com; Carrer de la Princesa 11; h10.30am-2pm & 4-7.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
For more than 100 years, the owners have been keeping locals both astounded and amused. Should you decide to stay in Barcelona and make a living as a magician, this is the place to buy levitation brooms, glasses of disappearing milk and decks of magic cards.
VILA VINITECAWINE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 777 70 17; www.vilaviniteca.es; Carrer dels Agullers 7; h8.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
One of the best wine stores in Barcelona (and there are a few…), Vila Viniteca has been searching out the best local and imported wines since 1932. On a couple of November evenings it organises what has become an almost riotous wine-tasting event in Carrer dels Agullers and surrounding lanes, at which cellars from around Spain present their young new wines.
CASA GISPERTFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 75 35; www.casagispert.com; Carrer dels Sombrerers 23; h10am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
The wonderful, atmospheric and wood-fronted Casa Gispert has been toasting nuts and selling all manner of dried fruit since 1851. Pots and jars piled high on the shelves contain an unending variety of crunchy titbits: some roasted, some honeyed, all of them moreish. Your order is shouted over to the till, along with the price, in a display of old-world accounting.
EL MAGNÍFICOCOFFEE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 60 81; www.cafeselmagnifico.com; Carrer de l’Argenteria 64; h9.30am-8pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
All sorts of coffee has been roasted here since the early 20th century. The variety of coffee (and tea) available is remarkable – and the aromas hit you as you walk in. Across the road, the same people run the exquisite tea shop Sans i Sans MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 310 25 18; www.sansisans.com; Carrer de l’Argenteria 59; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat).
MI.VINTAGEVINTAGE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.mivintagelabel.com; Carrer dels Consellers 2; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat; mBarceloneta)
Opened in 2017, this breathtakingly hip vintage store stocks a mix of secondhand and revamped clothes – treated, repaired, improved or, as the owner says, made ‘street-ready’. Expect silk bomber jackets aplenty, colourful leather blazers, Hawaiian shirts and Emian sunglasses, along with Taschen books, Casio digital watches and funky PVC jewellery.
OGGETTODESIGN
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 515 31 11; www.oggettobcn.com; Carrer dels Canvis Nous 4; h4.30pm-8.30pm Mon, 12.30pm-8.30pm Tue-Sat, from 4.30pm Tue-Sat Jul, closed Aug; mBarceloneta)
A gorgeous little showcase for designer homeware. The cushions are made locally and based on the typical ‘mosaic’ Barcelona floor tiles, but look out too for the Scandi tea sets, stunning hand-blown glassware from France and colourful wire baskets made in Milan.
MARSALADAGIFTS & SOUVENIRS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %609 285953; www.marsaladadesign.com; Carrer de Sant Jacint 6; h10am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
For souvenirs with a difference, Marsalada has hand-printed tote bags in unbleached cotton, engravings and T-shirts. Each of these is emblazoned with a well-known Barcelona attraction, sketched in pen and ink and adorned with abstract colour mosaics.
LOISAIDACLOTHING, ANTIQUES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 295 54 92; www.loisaidabcn.com; Carrer dels Flassaders 42; h11am-9pm Mon-Sat, 11am-2pm & 4-8pm Sun; mJaume I)
A sight in its own right, housed in the former coach house and stables for the Royal Mint, Loisaida (from the Spanglish for ‘Lower East Side’) is a deceptively large emporium of colourful, retro and somewhat preppy clothing for men and women, costume jewellery, music from the 1940s and ’50s and some covetable antiques. One space is devoted entirely to denim.
ARLEQUÍ MÀSCARESARTS & CRAFTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 27 52; www.arlequimask.com; Carrer de la Princesa 7; h11.30am-8pm Mon, 10.30am-8pm Tue-Fri, 11am-8pm Sat, 11.30am-7pm Sun; mJaume I)
A wonderful little oasis of originality, this shop specialises in masks for costume and decoration. Some of the pieces are superb, while stock also includes a beautiful range of decorative boxes in Catalan themes, and some old-style marionettes.
COQUETTEFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 29 76; www.coquettebcn.com; Carrer del Rec 65; h11am-3pm & 5-9pm Mon-Fri, 11.30am-9pm Sat; mBarceloneta)
With its spare, cut-back and designer look, this friendly fashion store is attractive in its own right. Women can browse through casual, feminine wear by such designers as Humanoid, Vanessa Bruno, UKE and Hoss Intropia and others, with a further collection nearby at Carrer de Bonaire 5 (MAP; %93 310 35 35).
HOFMANN PASTISSERIAFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 82 21; www.hofmann-bcn.com; Carrer dels Flassaders 44; h9am-2pm & 3.30-8pm Mon-Sat, 9am-2.30pm Sun; mBarceloneta)
With its painted wooden cabinets, this bite-sized gourmet patisserie, linked to the prestigious Hofmann cooking school, has an air of timelessness. Choose between jars of delicious chocolates, the renowned croissants (in various flavours) and more dangerous pastries, or an array of cakes and other sweet treats.
NU SABATESSHOES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 03 83; www.nusabates.com; Carrer dels Cotoners 14; h11am-8pm Mon-Sat; mJaume I)
A modern-day Catalan cobbler has put together some original handmade leather shoes for men and women (and a handful of bags and other leather items) in their friendly and stylish locale, which is enlivened by some inspired musical selections.
OLISOLIVAFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 14 72; www.olisoliva.com; Mercat de Santa Caterina; h9.30am-3.30pm Mon, Wed & Sat, to 7pm Tue, to 8pm Thu-Fri; mJaume I)
Inside the Mercat de Santa Caterina, this simple, glassed-in store is stacked with olive oils and vinegars from all over Spain. Taste some of the products before deciding. Some of the best olive oils come from southern Spain. The range of vinegars is astounding, too.
CUSTO BARCELONAFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 268 78 93; www.custo.com; Plaça de les Olles 7; hnoon-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mBarceloneta)
The psychedelic decor and casual atmosphere lend this avant-garde Barcelona fashion store a youthful edge. Custo presents daring new women’s and men’s collections each year on the New York catwalks. The dazzling colours and cut of everything from dinner jackets to hot pants are for the uninhibited. It has three other stores around town.
2SPORTS & ACTIVITIES


AIRE DE BARCELONASPA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 295 57 43; www.airedebarcelona.com; Passeig de Picasso 22; thermal baths & aromatherapy Mon-Thu €36, Fri-Sun €39; h9am-11pm Sun-Thu, to midnight Fri & Sat; mArc de Triomf)
With low lighting and relaxing perfumes wafting around you, this basement spa could be the perfect way to end a day. Hot, warm and cold baths, steam baths and options for various massages, including on a slab of hot marble, make for a delicious hour or so. Book ahead and bring a swimming costume.







Barceloneta & the Waterfront

Neighbourhood Top Five

3 Museu Can Framis Studying avant-garde paintings by contemporary Catalan artists in the up-and-coming, formerly industrial neighbourhood of Poblenou.
4 Platja de la Nova Mar Bella Basking on this sun-kissed sandy beach, before an invigorating dip in the glittering Mediterranean.
5 Teleférico del Puerto Gazing out over the city on a scenic 10-minute cable-car ride from the Barceloneta seaside to hilltop Montjuïc.

Local Life
AHang-outs There are many great local haunts full of flowing cava, beer and flavourful tapas: Vaso de Oro and Can Paixano are long-time favourites, while Perikete is a popular newcomer.
ABeach action From June to September informal rustic bars known as chiringuitos dot the sands, doling out cold drinks and festive ambience.
Getting There & Away
AFoot From the old city, La Rambla and Via Laietana are the main pedestrian access points across busy Ronda del Litoral.
Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
If you’d like to explore the sea and the mountains on the same day, take advantage of the Teleférico del Puerto cable car, which whisks passengers from Barceloneta’s Torre de Sant Sebastià up to Montjuïc.
5 Best Places to Eat
ALa Barra de Carles Abellán 
ACan Solé
AMinyam
AOaxaca
ACan Recasens
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
APerikete
ABlackLab
ACan Paixano
ABodega Vidrios y Cristales 
AAbsenta
For reviews, see here.
7 Best Places to Shop
AEls Encants Vells 
ALa Bazart
ABestiari
ASystem Action
AVernita
For reviews, see here.



TOP SIGHT
EL POBLENOU PLATGES
From the Port Olímpic marina, gold-sand beaches stretch northeast. Although the beaches are largely artificial, it doesn’t stop millions of swimmers and sunbathers flocking here each year.


DINO GEROMELLA/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO ©
DON’T MISS

AThe vibrant bustle of Platja de la Nova Icària
AThe poignant El petó de la mort sculpture in Cementiri del Poblenou
PRACTICALITIES

AMAP GOOGLE MAP, E3
Ahttp://lameva.barcelona.cat
AmCiutadella Vila Olímpica, Llacuna, Poblenou, Selva de Mar
The busiest of El Poblenou’s beaches is the southernmost, Platja de la Nova Icària. Across the Avinguda del Litoral highway behind the beach is the Plaça dels Campions, site of the rusting three-tiered platform used to honour medallists in the sailing events of the 1992 Olympic Games.
Heading north, the next beach is Platja de Bogatell. Just inland, the 1773-created Cementiri del Poblenou contains bombastic family memorials. An altogether disquieting touch is the sculpture El petó de la mort (The Kiss of Death), in which a winged skeleton kisses a young kneeling lifeless body.
At Platja de la Mar Bella, there’s a brief nudist strip. Platja de la Nova Mar Bella follows, leading into the contemporary residential and commercial waterfront strip, the Front Marítim, part of the Diagonal Mar project in the modern El Fòrum district. Fronting it is the last of these artificial beaches to be created, Platja del Llevant.
1SIGHTS

1 Port Vell & Barceloneta
TELEFÉRICO DEL PUERTOCABLE CAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.telefericodebarcelona.com; Passeig de Joan de Borbó; one way/return €11/16.50; h10.30am-8pm Jun-early Sep, shorter hours early Sep-May; gV15, 39, mBarceloneta)
First built for the 1929 Expo, this cable car strung across the harbour to Montjuïc provides an eagle-eye view of the city. The cabins float between the Torre de Sant Sebastià (Barceloneta) – topped by a panoramic restaurant, Torre d’Alta Mar MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 221 00 07; www.torredealtamar.com; Torre de Sant Sebastià, Passeig de Joan de Borbó 88; mains €34.50-44, seven-/nine-course menus €80/96, €112/135 with wine; h1-3.30pm Tue-Thu, 1-3.30pm & 7.30-11pm Fri & Sat) – and Miramar (Montjuïc). The total 1292m journey takes around 10 minutes. Be aware the cable car doesn’t run in windy conditions.
EDGE BREWINGBREWERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.edgebrewing.com; Carrer de Llull 62; tours incl beer tastings €20; htours by appointment; mBogatell)
Founded by two Americans in 2013, Edge Brewing has racked up some impressive awards for its craft beers (among other accolades, RateBeer.com named it the top new brewer in the world the year after it opened). Two-hour English-language brewery tours take you behind the scenes and offer the chance to taste classic brews and seasonal varieties, like the Hoptimista, an award-winning 6.6% IPA, and the passionfruit sour ale Apassionada.
BEACH LIBRARIES

In July and August (typically 10am to 5pm Tuesday to Sunday), the city sets up biblioplatges (‘beach libraries’) underneath the boardwalk at the northern end of Platja de la Barceloneta MAP GOOGLE MAP; (http://lameva.barcelona.cat; mBarceloneta) – technically called Platja de Somorrostro – and at Platja de la Mar Bella at the Espigó de Bac de Roda. You’ll find magazines, newspapers and a small foreign-language selection among the Spanish titles.
At the same locations, you can also hire out frisbees, volleyballs and nets, beach rackets, balls and petanque games; for the kiddies, you’ll find buckets, spades and watering cans. They’re free to use; all you need to hire out books or gear is your ID.
BARCELONA HEADSCULPTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Passeig de Colom; mBarceloneta)
An icon by the waterfront, this eye-catching 15m-high primary-coloured sculpture was designed by famous American pop artist Roy Lichtenstein for the 1992 Olympics.

HOMENATGE A LA NATACIÓSCULPTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Homage to the Swimmers; Plaça del Mar; mBarceloneta)
Designed by Alfredo Lanz in 2004, this steel sculpture depicts various graceful if abstract poses of swimmers taking to the sea.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
MEET YOU AT THE CUBES

German artist Rebecca Horn’s elegant Homenatge a la Barceloneta MAP GOOGLE MAP; (Homage to Barceloneta; MAP; Passeig Marítim; mBarceloneta) sculpture was commissioned for the 1992 Olympics and commemorates the old-fashioned shacks that once lined the beach.
Popularly known as ‘The Cubes’, it’s a time-honoured seaside meeting place.
1 Port Olímpic, Poblenou & El Fòrum
EL POBLENOU PLATGESBEACH
See here.
MUSEU CAN FRAMISMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 320 87 36; www.fundaciovilacasas.com; Carrer de Roc Boronat 116-126; adult/child €5/2; h11am-6pm Tue-Sat, to 2pm Sun; mGlòries, Llacuna)
Set in an 18th-century former textile factory, this contemporary museum is a showcase for Catalan painting from the 1960s onwards. The galleries display some 300 works, arranged in thought-provoking ways – with evocative paintings by different artists (sometimes working in different time periods) creating fascinating intersections and collisions.
Highlights include the intricate, tapestry-style paintings of Victor Pérez-Porro, desolate black-and-white scenes of Gregori Iglesias, dreamlike sequences of Perejaume, photographic portraits by Pedro Madueño, Agustí Puig’s ethereal Menines (whose point of departure is Velázquez’ iconic Las meninas created three centuries earlier) and the luminous works by self-taught painter Xevi Vilaro.
MUSEU DEL DISSENY DE BARCELONAMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 68 00; www.museudeldisseny.cat; Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes 37; permanent/temporary exhibition adult €6/4.50, child €4/3, combination ticket adult/child €8/5.50, free from 3pm Sun & 1st Sun of the month; h10am-8pm Tue-Sun; mGlòries)
Barcelona’s design museum lies inside a monolithic contemporary building with geometric facades and a rather brutalist appearance that’s nicknamed la grapadora (the stapler) by locals. Inside, it houses a dazzling collection of ceramics, decorative arts and textiles, and is a must for anyone interested in the design world.
Start at the top and work your way down. On the 4th floor, you’ll enter the terrain of the graphic arts, specifically posters from Catalan design firms dating from the post-WWII years to the present. On the floor below, the museum provides a highly condensed overview of fashion from the 1500s onward. Among other things, you’ll find a dramatically lit room with 19th-century crinolines (cage-like frames worn as an undergarment to hold up flouncy dresses), displayed like rare sea creatures inside giant glass tubes.
The 2nd floor is devoted to the decorative arts, with a wildly varied collection that includes 3rd-century Coptic works, an elaborate 16th-century Brussels tapestry, antique jewel-crusted pocket watches, and sculptural works by Picasso and Miró. Don’t miss the glittering stained-glass panel created for the 1888 Expo. The 1st floor houses Catalan product design from the 20th century – worth a quick peek for the furniture.
Temporary exhibitions run the gamut from 17th-century Turkish ceramics to contemporary fashion photography.
CEMENTIRI DEL POBLENOUCEMETERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Poblenou Cemetery; %93 225 16 61; www.cbsa.cat; Av d’Icària; h8am-6pm; mLlacuna) F
Located just inland from Platja de Bogatell near Carrer del Taulat, this cemetery dates from 1773. The cemetery was positioned outside the then city limits for health reasons; its central monument commemorates the victims of a yellow-fever epidemic that swept across Barcelona in 1821. It is full of bombastic family memorials, but an altogether disquieting touch is the sculpture El petó de la mort (The Kiss of Death), in which a winged skeleton kisses a young kneeling lifeless body.
PARC DEL CENTRE DEL POBLENOUPARK
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Avinguda Diagonal; h10am-sunset; mPoblenou)
Barcelona is sprinkled with parks whose principal element is concrete, and Jean Nouvel’s 5-hectare Parc del Centre del Poblenou, with its statuary and stylised metal seats, is no exception. However, the park’s Gaudí-inspired walls are increasingly covered by rambling bougainvillea and, inside, some 1000 mostly Mediterranean trees, including 35 palm species, are complemented by thousands of aromatic bushes and plants. Nouvel’s idea is that the trees, sustained by local ground water, will eventually form a natural canopy over the park.
MUSEU DE LA MÚSICAMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 36 50; www.museumusica.bcn.cat; Carrer de Lepant 150; adult/child €6/4.50, free from 3pm Sun; h10am-6pm Tue, Wed & Fri, to 9pm Thu, to 7pm Sat & Sun; mMonumental)
Some 500 instruments (less than a third of those held) are on show in this museum, housed on the 2nd floor of the administration building in L’Auditori, the city’s main classical-music concert hall.
Instruments range from a 17th-century baroque guitar through to lutes (look out for the many-stringed 1641 archilute from Venice), violins, Japanese kotos, sitars from India, eight organs (some dating from the 18th century), pianos and a varied collection of drums and other percussion instruments from across Spain and beyond, along with all sorts of phonographs and gramophones. There are some odd pieces indeed, like the buccèn, a snake-head-adorned brass instrument. Much of the documentary and sound material can be enjoyed through audiovisual displays as you proceed.
The museum periodically hosts daytime concerts, in which musicians perform on rare instruments held in the collection.
EL FÒRUMAREA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; mEl Maresme Fòrum)
Once an urban wasteland, this area has seen dramatic changes since the turn of the millennium, with sparkling buildings, open plazas and waterfront recreation areas. The most striking element is the eerily blue, triangular 2001: A Space Odyssey–style Edifici Fòrum building by Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron, which houses the Museu Blau .
MUSEU BLAUMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Blue Museum; %93 256 60 02; www.museuciencies.cat; Edifici Fòrum, Parc del Fòrum; adult/child €6/free, free from 3pm Sun & 1st Sun of month; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat, to 8pm Sun Mar-Sep, to 6pm Tue-Fri, to 7pm Sat, to 8pm Sun Oct-Feb; mEl Maresme Fòrum)
Set inside the futuristic Edifici Fòrum, the Museu Blau takes visitors on a journey across the natural world. Multimedia and interactive exhibits explore topics like the history of evolution, the earth’s formation and the great scientists who have helped shaped human knowledge. There are also specimens from the animal, plant and mineral kingdoms – plus dinosaur skeletons – all rather dramatically set amid the sprawling 9000 sq metres of exhibition space.
TORRE GLÒRIESARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Avinguda Diagonal 225; mGlòries)
Barcelona’s cucumber-shaped tower, Jean Nouvel’s luminous Torre Glòries (formerly Torre Agbar) is among the most daring additions to the skyline since the first towers of La Sagrada Família went up. Completed in 2005, the 38-storey structure shimmers at night in shades of midnight blue and lipstick red. The interior is home to offices and is closed to the public.
REMEMBERING THE VICTIMS OF FRANCO

Buried beneath the concrete expanses, bathing zone and marina created in El Fòrum lies the memory of more than 2000 people executed in the fields of Camp de la Bota between 1936 and 1952, most of them under Franco from 1939 onward. A commemorative, Fraternitat (Brotherhood), by Miquel Navarro, stands on Rambla de Prim.
5EATING

5 Port Vell & Barceloneta
VASO DE OROTAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 30 98; www.vasodeoro.com; Carrer de Balboa 6; tapas €4-12; h11am-midnight; mBarceloneta)
Always packed, this narrow bar gathers a high-spirited crowd who come for fantastic tapas. Wisecracking, white-jacketed waiters serve plates of grilled gambes (prawns), foie a la plancha (grilled liver pâté) or solomillo (sirloin) chunks. Want something a little different to drink? Ask for a flauta cincuenta – half lager and half dark beer.
LA COVA FUMADATAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 40 61; Carrer del Baluard 56; tapas €4-12; h9am-3.15pm Mon-Wed, 9am-3.15pm & 6-8.15pm Thu & Fri, 9am-1pm Sat; mBarceloneta)
There’s no sign and the setting is decidedly downmarket, but this tiny, buzzing family-run tapas spot always packs in a crowd. The secret? Mouthwatering pulpo (octopus), calamari, sardines, bombas (meat and potato croquettes served with aioli) and grilled carxofes (artichokes) cooked in the open kitchen. Everything is amazingly fresh.
CAN MAÑOSEAFOOD€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer del Baluard 12; mains €7-15; h8-11pm Mon, 8.30am-4pm & 8-11pm Tue-Fri, 8.30am-4pm Sat; mBarceloneta)
It may look like a dive, but you’ll need to be prepared to wait before being squeezed in at a packed table for a raucous night of raciones (full-plate-size tapas serving) over a bottle of cloudy white turbio (Galician wine) at this family-run stalwart. The seafood is abundant, with first-rate squid, prawns and fish served at rock-bottom prices.
LA BODEGA LA PENINSULARTAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 40 89; www.tabernaycafetin.es; Carrer del Mar 29; tapas €3.50-9; h11.30am-midnight; mBarceloneta) S
Wine barrels double as tables at this traditional bodega, where over three dozen different tapas dishes pair with Catalan vintages and house-made vermouth. Adhering to the Slow Food ethos, ingredients are organic, seasonal and locally sourced; try the mojama (salt-cured, air-dried tuna) or renowned spicy bombas (meat and potato croquettes) topped with tangy aioli. It’s standing room only most nights.
NAP MARPIZZA€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 007 36 39; www.facebook.com/nap; Carrer del Baluard 69; pizzas €5-10; h1.30-4.30pm & 8pm-midnight Mon-Fri, 1.30pm-midnight Sat & Sun; Wv; mBarceloneta)
NAP (Neapolitan Authentic Pizza) has an elegant dining room but its location footsteps from Platja de Sant Miquel makes it perfect for picking up a pizza to take to the beach. Fired in an Italian Stefano Ferrara wood-burning oven, pizzas come with toppings such as speck, truffle cream and ruccola, with plenty of veggie varieties available.
FILFERROTAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 98 36; Carrer de Sant Carles 29; tapas €5-8, mains €7-12; h10am-1am; Wv; mBarceloneta)
One of the few spots in Barceloneta where the focus isn’t on seafood, Filferro has a loyal following for its good-value tapas, bocadillos (filled rolls), salads and pasta. It has a warmly lit and eclectically furnished interior, or you can dine at an outdoor table on the square (popular with families, with a playground just a few steps away).
BALUARD BARCELONETABAKERY€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer del Baluard 38; items €1-3.50; h8am-9pm Mon-Sat; mBarceloneta)
Baluard has one of the best ranges of freshly baked breads in the city, along with filled baguettes that are perfect for beach picnics. It also bakes a range of tempting pastries, such as xuiuixo (deep-fried custard-filled pastries from Girona) and bunyols (doughnut-shaped pastries stuffed with cheese or jam), and tarts such as fig or wild berries.
MAIANSTAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 10 20; Carrer de Sant Carles 28; tapas €4-8, mains €8-22; h1-4pm & 8-11pm Tue-Sat; mBarceloneta)
This tiny jovial bar serves excellent tapas to a hip, largely neighbourhood crowd. Highlights include the not-to-be-missed cazón en adobo (marinated fried dogfish) and mejillones a la marinera (mussels in a rich tomato broth) followed by hearty arroz negra (paella with cuttlefish and squid ink).
BITÁCORATAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 11 10; Carrer de Balboa 1; tapas €4-12.50; h9am-2.30am Mon-Fri, from 10am Sat & Sun; mBarceloneta)
Bitácora is a neighbourhood favourite for its simple but congenial ambience and well-priced tapas plates, which come in ample portions. There’s also a small hidden terrace at the back. Top picks: ceviche de pescado (fish ceviche), chipirones (baby squid) and gambas a la plancha (grilled prawns). Cash only, no cards.
KAIKUSEAFOOD€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 90 82; www.restaurantkaiku.cat; Plaça del Mar 1; mains €13-19; h1-3.30pm & 7-10.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-3.30pm Sun; mBarceloneta)
Overlooking the waterfront at the south end of Barceloneta, Kaiku incorporates ingredients from the nearby fish market in dishes such as crayfish with mint, swordfish carpaccio with avocado and sun-dried tomatoes, chilli-smeared tuna with green apples and mushrooms, and rice dishes for two.
GREEN SPOTVEGETARIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 802 55 65; www.encompaniadelobos.com/en/the-green-spot; Carrer de la Reina Cristina 12; mains €10-15; h12.30pm-midnight Mon-Fri, from 1pm Sat & Sun; v; mBarceloneta)
Purple carrot salad with papaya and feta, aubergine and courgette tacos, buckwheat and spinach spätzle (hand-rolled egg noodles), sweet potato gnocchi with black truffle, and hemp pizza with cashew cheese and asparagus are among the inventive vegetarian, vegan and gluten-free dishes presented in a stylish, minimalist dining room with vaulted ceilings. Live flamenco plays on Tuesday evenings.
BARRACASEAFOOD€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 224 12 53; www.tribuwoki.com; Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta 1; mains €16-22; h12.30-11pm; v; mBarceloneta) S
Opening to an elevated terrace, this buzzing space has mesmerising views over the Mediterranean – a key reference point in the all-organic dishes served here. Start off with a cauldron of chilli-infused clams, cockles and mussels before moving on to the lavish rice dishes. Vegetarian options are plentiful and it’s one of the few places in Barcelona serving a vegan paella.
L’ÒSTIATAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 47 58; www.facebook.com/barceloneta; Plaça de la Barceloneta 1; tapas €2.50-8, mains €11-19; h10am-11.45pm; W; mBarceloneta)
On a charming hidden square, this neighbourhood bar opens to a terrace facing Barceloneta’s beautiful baroque church Església de Sant Miquel del Port. Tapas reflect the area’s heritage but also come with fusion twists like Szechuan pepper-dusted sardines or Spanish omelette with duck and truffles. Wines are primarily Catalan; the sangría is some of the best around.
oLA BARRA DE CARLES ABELLÁNSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 760 51 29; www.carlesabellan.com/mis-restaurantes/la-barra; Passeig Joan de Borbó 19; tapas €5-8.50, mains €24-36; h1.30-4pm & 8-11pm; mBarceloneta)
Catalan chef Carles Abellán’s stunning glass-encased, glossy-tiled restaurant celebrates seafood in tapas such as pickled octopus, mini anchovy omelettes and fried oyster with salmon roe. Even more show-stopping are the mains: grilled razor clams with ponzu citrus sauce, squid filled with spicy poached egg yolk, stir-fried sea cucumber, and lush lobster paella with smoked prawns.
oOAXACAMEXICAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 018 06 59; www.oaxacacuinamexicana.com; Pla de Palau 19; mains €22-32; h1-4pm & 8pm-midnight; v; mBarceloneta)
Chef Joan Bagur trained in Mexico for a decade under traditional cooks, and has his own garden of Mexican plants, which supplies ingredients for culinary creations like coyoacán (roast corn with chilli ash) and cochinita pibil (slow-roasted pork tacos). Hefty tables are made from Mexican hardwoods and original Mexican art lines the walls; there’s alfresco seating under the cloisters.
oCAN SOLÉSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 50 12; http://restaurantcansole.com; Carrer de Sant Carles 4; mains €17-39; h1-4pm & 8-11pm Tue-Thu, 1-4pm & 8.30-11pm Fri & Sat, 1-4pm Sun; mBarceloneta)
Behind imposing wooden doors, this elegant restaurant with white-clothed tables and white-jacketed waiters has been serving seafood since 1903, and is now run by the fourth generation of owners. Freshly landed seafood stars in traditional dishes such as arròs caldòs (rice broth with squid and langoustines) and zarzuela (casserole with ground almonds, saffron, garlic, tomatoes, mussels, fish and white wine).
RESTAURANT 7 PORTESSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 30 33; www.7portes.com; Passeig d’Isabel II 14; mains €19-32; h1pm-1am; W; mBarceloneta)
Founded in 1836 as a cafe and converted into a restaurant in 1929, 7 Portes has a grand setting beneath the cloisters, and exudes an old-world atmosphere with its wood panelling, tiles, mirrors and plaques naming luminaries – such as Orson Welles – who have passed through. Paella is the speciality, or try the gran plat de marisc (‘big plate of seafood’).
CAN MAJÓSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 54 55; www.canmajo.es; Carrer del Almirall Aixada 23; mains €15-36; h1-4pm & 8-11.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-4pm Sun; mBarceloneta)
On a square across from the beachside promenade, with outdoor tables and heat lamps in winter, Can Majó has a long and steady reputation for fine seafood, particularly its rice dishes and bountiful suquets (fish stews). The bouillabaisse of fish and seafood is succulent.
SUQUET DE L’ALMIRALLSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 62 33; www.suquetdelalmirall.com; Passeig de Joan de Borbó 65; mains €16-28; h1-11pm Tue-Sat; mBarceloneta)
A family business, Suquet De L’Almirall does a short but stellar updated take on top-class seafood. The house speciality is its ‘paella Catalan’, with 12 different types of seafood; other dishes include wild Avilés turbot, salt-baked sea bass, and baby squid stuffed with anchovies and black rice. Arrive early to nab one of the few outdoor tables.
LA GAVINASEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 05 95; www.grupgavina.es; Plaça Pau Vila 1; mains €18-44; hnoon-11.30pm; mBarceloneta)
The pick of the promenade-facing restaurants in the 19th-century edifice Palau de Mar is this swish white-tableclothed seafood specialist, whose interior is dominated by neon-lit glass-fronted wine cabinets containing over 300 Spanish and Catalan varieties. Swordfish marinated in garlic and white wine, squid-ink shell-off paella, and spectacular seafood platters on beds of shaved ice are highlights.
1881BASQUE€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 00 50; www.gruposagardi.com/restaurante/1881-per-sagardi; Plaça de Pau Vila 3; mains €19-29; hkitchen 10am-midnight Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat, bar to 1am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mBarceloneta)
On the top floor of the Museu d’Història de Catalunya, 1881 has dazzling views over the waterfront. Txuletón (aged Basque beef) is a speciality, complemented by Basque wines. It’s a great stop for cocktails (particularly around sunset); the terrace transitions into a festive party space later on weekend nights.
CAN ROSSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 45 79; www.canros.cat; Carrer del Almirall Aixada 7; mains €15-29; h1-4pm & 7-11pm Tue-Sun; mBarceloneta)
The fifth generation is now at the controls of this immutable seafood favourite, which first opened in 1908. In a restaurant where the decor is a reminder of simpler times, there’s a straightforward guiding principle: juicy fresh fish cooked with a light touch.
qCycling Tour
Barcelona’s Waterfront

START PORT VELL
END PORT VELL
LENGTH 12KM RETURN, 1½ HOURS
This bike tour takes in boardwalks, beaches, sculpture and architecture along Barcelona’s ever-changing waterfront. It’s a flat and safe ride along a dedicated bike path separate from traffic – though watch out for pedestrians. There are several convenient places to hire bikes nearby, including Barcelona Biking (www.barcelonabiking.com) in the Barri Gòtic.
With Columbus at your back, make your way northeast along the waterfront. Keep an eye out for the three-mast schooner, 1Pailebot de Santa Eulàlia, built in 1918. You can see it perfectly well without going aboard; there’s not an awful lot to behold below deck. Another 400m up the road, you’ll pass the colourful 2Barcelona Head sculpture. Soaring 15m high, it was created by American pop artist Roy Lichtenstein for the 1992 Olympics.
As you make your way along the 3marina, you may have to dismount amid the throng of strollers and open-air restaurants. Hop back on and pedal to the Plaça del Mar, which sports an elegant sculpture entitled 4Homenatge a la Natació. The abstract work was designed by Alfredo Lanz in 2004.
Follow the crowds north, past another well-known sculpture, the 5Homenatge a la Barceloneta, installed by German artist Rebecca Horn. Cycle another kilometre and you’ll pass beneath the copper-hued 6Peix sculpture, designed by Frank Gehry.
Next up is 7Port Olímpic, which is lined with restaurants and bars. From here you’ll pass more 8beaches, which fill with sunseekers in summer.
At the end, you’ll find the 9El Fòrum precinct. Dominating its empty Parc del Fòrum plaza is the rather harsh-looking sculpture aFraternitat, dedicated to the hundreds executed here during the Franco years.
The protected bathing area bZona de Banys is a popular summer attraction for families. Just behind it looms the giant solar panel that powers the area. From here, you can retrace your journey back to Port Vell.
5 Port Olímpic, Poblenou & El Fòrum
EL 58TAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Le cinquante huit; Rambla del Poblenou 58; tapas €3.50-12; h1.30-11pm Tue-Sat, to 4pm Sun; mLlacuna)
This French-Catalan place serves imaginative, beautifully prepared tapas dishes: codfish balls with romesco sauce, scallop ceviche, tartiflette (cheese, ham and potato casserole), salmon tartare. Solo diners can take a seat at the marble-topped front bar. The back dining room with its exposed brick walls, industrial light fixtures and local artworks is a lively place to linger over a long meal.
EL TÍO CHÉCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.eltioche.es; Rambla del Poblenou 44; dishes €2-6; h10am-10pm Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; mPoblenou)
First opened back in 1912 (in El Born), this local icon is famed for its horchata, a sweet and refreshing if mildly grainy drink made of tigernut milk. Some love it, others less so, though you can also opt for other homemade beverages along with sandwiches and ice cream.
TIMESBURG POBLENOUBURGERS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.timesburg.com; Carrer de Pujades 168; burgers €6-13; h1-4.30pm & 8.30pm-midnight; W; mPoblenou)
Barcelona success story Timesburg has several locations including this cavernous mezzanine space in El Poblenou. Burger buns are stamped with its logo; its 16 different varieties include La Massimo (beef, parmesan, sun-dried tomato, sunflower seeds and red onion) and Balear (Mallorca sausage, Mahón cheese, capers and honey mayo). Hand-cut fries are twice-fried in olive oil.
MÉS DE VITAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 007 91 51; www.mesdvi.cat; Carrer de Marià Aguiló 123; tapas €8-13; h7-11pm Mon, 1-4pm & 7-11pm Tue-Sat; mPoblenou)
At this buzzing wine bar, Catalan wines are accompanied by tapas dishes that are inventive and delicious: courgette pesto and burrata salad, red tuna pickled with Peruvian yellow chilli, smoked mackerel with aubergine caviar and lamb neck with mashed baked turnip. Brick walls, hardwood floors, timber tables and studded Chesterfield sofas give it a cosy ambience.
CAL CUCASIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 000 28 37; www.mosquitotapas.com/calcuc; Carrer del Taulat 109; tapas €4-8; h6pm-midnight Mon-Thu, 1pm-1am Fri-Sun; v; mPoblenou)
At this sleek spot, Asian street-food-inspired tapas such as Chinese-inspired bang bang aubergine (in spicy sauce), gyoza (Japanese pan-fried dumplings), kimchi (Korean fermented cabbage), tofu larb (Laotian marinated tofu) and takoyaki (Japanese battered octopus) pair with craft beers from local brewers including BeerCat, Guineu and Les Clandestines.
L’ATELIER BY AMISCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %662 370229; www.atelierpoblenou.com; Carrer del Joncar 29; dishes €2-9; h9.30am-1.30pm & 4-8.30pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun; mPoblenou)
Behind a blond-wood facade, this sweet little cafe has bare boards, fresh flowers and a great array of home-baked cakes, cupcakes, pancakes, sweet and savoury scones, and gourmet bagels such as smoked salmon with beetroot slaw and lemon aioli.
CAN DENDÊAMERICAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %646 325551; www.candende.com; Carrer de la Ciutat de Granada 44; dishes €5-13; h9am-4pm Mon-Thu, to 4.30pm Fri, 10am-4.30pm Sat & Sun; mLlacuna)
An eclectic crowd gathers at this bohemian Brazilian-run spot in El Poblenou. All-day brunch is the culinary star here: you can tuck into eggs Benedict with smoked salmon, fluffy pancakes or pulled pork sandwiches, accompanied by a bloody Mary or homemade pink lemonade by the jug while watching the cooks in action and listening to Latin tropicalia and American grooves.
AGUARIBAYVEGETARIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 300 37 90; www.aguaribay-bcn.com; Carrer del Taulat 95; mains €7-13; h1-4pm Mon-Wed, 1-4pm & 8.30-11pm Thu-Sat, 1-4.30pm Sun; v; mLlacuna) S
Polished Aguaribay serves a small well-executed à la carte menu by night: miso and smoked tofu meatballs, soba noodles with shiitake mushrooms, and seasonal vegetables with rich black rice, along with craft beers and biodynamic wines. At lunchtime, stop in for the prix-fixe lunch specials, which change daily. All ingredients are organic; vegan and gluten-free options abound.
oMINYAMSEAFOOD€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 348 36 18; www.facebook.com/minyamcisco; Carrer de Pujades 187; tapas €2-10, mains €15-25; h12.30pm-midnight Tue-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat, to 5pm Sun; c; mPoblenou)
Billowing with smoke beneath a tajine-like metal lid, smouldering herbs infuse the rice of Minyam’s signature Vulcanus (smoked seafood paella with squid ink). Tapas dishes at this stylish, contemporary El Poblenou restaurant are equally inventive and include asparagus fritters, oysters with sea urchin and lemon, fried anchovies, and prawn tortillas. Crayons and paper are provided for kids.
oCAN RECASENSCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 300 81 23; www.facebook.com/canrecasens; Rambla del Poblenou 102; mains €8-21; h8.30am-1.30pm & 5-11.45pm Mon, to 1am Tue-Thu, to 3am Fri, 9am-1pm & 9pm-3am Sat, 9pm-1am Sun; mPoblenou)
One of El Poblenou’s most romantic settings, Can Recasens hides a warren of warmly lit rooms full of oil paintings, flickering candles, fairy lights and baskets of fruit. The food is outstanding, with a mix of salads, smoked meats, fondues, and open sandwiches topped with delicacies like wild mushrooms and Brie, escalivada (grilled vegetables) and Gruyère, and spicy chorizo.
EL CALIU DEL POBLENOUCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %630 222488; http://caliupoblenou.eltenedor.rest; Rambla del Poblenou 78; mains €11-22; hnoon-11.45pm Tue-Sun; W; mPoblenou)
Right on the Rambla del Poblenou, this narrow-fronted restaurant opens to a rustic, elongated interior with exposed stone walls and dark timber tables. Paella comes in seafood, meat and vegetable varieties, but most locals head here for chargrilled meats (lamb, beef, Iberian pork and Catalan sausage) and poultry (including duck).
ELS PESCADORSSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 225 20 18; www.elspescadors.com; Plaça de Prim 1; mains €18-42; h1-3.45pm & 8-11.30pm; W; mPoblenou)
On a picturesque square lined with low houses and long-established South American bella ombre trees, this quaint family restaurant continues to serve some of the city’s best grilled fish and seafood-and-rice dishes. There are three dining areas inside: two are quite modern, while the main room preserves its old tavern flavour. On warm nights, try for a table outside.
XIRINGUITO ESCRIBÀSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 07 29; www.xiringuitoescriba.com; Avinguda del Litoral 62; mains €15-27; h1-5pm & 7-10.30pm Mon-Fri, 1-10.30pm Sat & Sun; mLlacuna)
The clan behind 1906-established Escribà’s sweets and pastries also operates one of Barcelona’s most popular waterfront seafood restaurants. This is one of the few places where one person can order paella or Catalan fideuà with vermicelli noodles (most restaurants require a minimum of two diners for these). Finish off with Escribà pastries for dessert.
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

6 Port Vell & Barceloneta
oPERIKETEWINE BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.gruporeini.net/perikete; Carrer de Llauder 6; h11am-1am; mBarceloneta)
Since opening in 2017, this fabulous wine bar has been jam-packed with locals. Hams hang from the ceilings, barrels of vermouth sit above the bar and wine bottles cram every available shelf space – over 200 varieties are available by the glass or bottle, accompanied by 50-plus tapas dishes. In the evening, the action spills into the street.
BODEGA VIDRIOS Y CRISTALESWINE BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.gruposagardi.com/restaurante/bodega-vidrios-y-cristales; Passeig d’Isabel II 6; hnoon-midnight Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; mBarceloneta)
In a history-steeped, stone-floored building dating from 1840, this atmospheric little jewel recreates a neighbourhood bodega with tins of sardines, anchovies and other delicacies lining the shelves (used in exquisite tapas dishes), house-made vermouth, and a wonderful array of wines. Be prepared to stand as there are no seats (a handful of upturned wine barrels let you rest your glass).
BLACKLABMICROBREWERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 83 60; www.blacklab.es; Plaça de Pau Vila 1; hnoon-1.30am; mBarceloneta)
Barcelona’s first brewhouse opened back in 2014 inside the historic Palau de Mar. Its taps feature 18 house-made brews, including saisons, double IPAs and dry stouts, and the brewmasters constantly experiment with new flavours, such as a sour Berliner Weisse with fiery jalapeño. One-hour tours (5pm Sundays; €12) offer a behind-the-scenes look at the brewers in action plus four samples.
The kitchen sizzles up burgers, barbecued pulled pork sandwiches and marinated ribs; other dishes include poké bowls.
ABSENTABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 36 38; www.absenta.bar; Carrer de Sant Carles 36; h6pm-2am Mon-Thu, 11am-3am Fri & Sat, 6pm-1am Sun; mBarceloneta)
Decorated with old paintings, vintage lamps and curious sculptures (including a dangling butterfly woman), this whimsical drinking den specialises in absinthe, with over 20 varieties available. (Go easy, though: an alcohol content of 50% to 90% provides a kick!) It also has a house-made vermouth, if you’re not a fan of the green fairy.
CAN PAIXANOWINE BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 310 08 39; www.canpaixano.com; Carrer de la Reina Cristina 7; h9am-10.30pm Mon-Sat; mBarceloneta)
This lofty cava bar (also called La Xampanyeria) has long been run on a winning formula. The standard tipple is bubbly rosé in elegant little glasses, combined with bite-sized bocadillos (filled rolls) and tapas. Note that this place is usually packed to the rafters, and elbowing your way to the bar can be a titanic struggle.
LA DELICIOSABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.ladeliciosabeachbar.com; Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta; h10am-10pm Mar-Oct; W; mBarceloneta)
Surfboards frame this beach bar on the sand at Platja de la Barceloneta – an idyllic spot for fresh juices, regional wines and cocktails such as Basil Instinct (vodka, pineapple juice, lemon, ginger, raspberries and basil) or Passion Smash (Jack Daniels, passionfruit pulp and mint). Soak them up with gourmet sandwiches, organic burgers, black-bean nachos and bite-size tapas.
THE MINTCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %647 737707; www.facebook.com/themintbarcelona; Passeig d’Isabel II 4; h7.30pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mBarceloneta)
Named after the prized cocktail ingredient, this mojito-loving spot has an upstairs bar where you can peruse the first-rate house-infused gins (over 20 on hand, including creative blends like lemon grass and Jamaican pepper). Downstairs in the brick-vaulted cellars, red lights and driving beats create a more celebratory vibe.
BAR LEOBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer de Sant Carles 34; hnoon-9.30pm; mBarceloneta)
An almost entirely barcelonin crowd spills out into the street from Bar Leo, a hole-in-the-wall drinking spot plastered with images of late Andalucian singer and heart-throb Bambino, and a jukebox mostly dedicated to flamenco. It’s at its liveliest on weekends.
SANTA MARTABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.santamartabarcelona.com; Carrer de Grau i Torras 59; h10am-midnight; mBarceloneta)
Just back from the beach, this laid-back bar attracts a garrulous mix of locals and expats, who come for prime people-watching at one of the outdoor tables near the boardwalk. Alongside classic cocktails, craft creations include Santa Delicious (tequila, Campari, pink grapefruit and mint). Over 15 varieties of thin-crust pizzas are also available.
CDLCLOUNGE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carpe Diem Lounge Club; %93 224 04 70; www.cdlcbarcelona.com; Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta 32; hnoon-5am; mCiutadella Vila Olímpica)
Ideal for a slow warm-up before heading to the nearby clubs, Carpe Diem Lounge Club has Asian-inspired decor and opens onto the beach. Its Asian-fusion food (sushi et al) is quite good, but pricey; alternatively wait until about midnight, when the tables are rolled up and the DJs and dancers take full control.
CATWALKCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 224 07 40; www.clubcatwalk.net; Carrer de Ramon Trias Fargas 2-4; cover €15-20; h11.30pm-6am; mCiutadella Vila Olímpica)
One of the largest nightclubs in the Port Olímpic area, beachside Catwalk has a capacity of 1000 over two floors. A well-dressed crowd piles in for good house music, occasionally mellowed down with electro, R&B, hip-hop and funk. The chill-out zone, with comfy lounges, is upstairs from the dance floor. Entry is usually free before 1am. Check the schedule online.
OPIUMCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 225 91 00; www.opiumbarcelona.com; Passeig Marítim de la Barceloneta 34; cover €10-20; hclub 10pm-5am Sun-Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat, restaurant from noon; mCiutadella Vila Olímpica)
This seaside dance place has a spacious dance floor that only begins to fill from about 3am and is best in summer, when you can spill onto a terrace overlooking the beach. The beachside outdoor section works as a chilled restaurant-cafe.
6 Port Olímpic, Poblenou & El Fòrum
BALIUSCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 86 50; www.baliusbar.com; Carrer de Pujades 196; h6pm-2am Tue & Wed, 5pm-3am Thu-Sat, to 1am Sun; mPoblenou)
There’s an old-fashioned jauntiness to this vintage cocktail den in El Poblenou. Staff pour a mix of classic libations as well as vermouths, and there’s a small tapas menu until 10.30pm. Stop by on Sundays to catch live jazz, starting around 7.30pm.
LA CERVECITA NUESTRA DE CADA DÍABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer de Llull 184; h11.30am-2pm & 5.30-9.30pm Tue-Sat, 5.30-9.30pm Sun & Mon; mLlacuna)
Equal parts beer shop and craft brew bar, La Cervecita has a changing selection of unique beers from around Europe and the USA. You might stumble across a Catalan sour fruit beer, a rare English stout, a potent Belgian triple ale or half a dozen other draughts on hand – plus many more varieties by the bottle.
ESPAI JOLIUCAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer Badajoz 95; h3-7pm Mon, 9am-7pm Tue-Fri, 10am-3pm Sat; W; mLlacuna)
Inspired by its owner’s time in Berlin, this is a charming little post-industrial space with pockmarked walls, concrete floors and exposed bulbs. Potted plants, art prints and ceramics are sold up the front. Tucked up the steps at the back, its peaceful cafe has recycled timber furniture and serves Barcelona-roasted Nømad coffee and organic cakes to a melodic indie soundtrack.
MADAME GEORGELOUNGE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.madamegeorgebar.com; Carrer de Pujades 179; h6pm-2am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, to 12.30am Sun; mPoblenou)
A theatrical (veering towards campy) elegance marks the interior of this small, chandelier-lit lounge just off the Rambla del Poblenou. Deft bartenders stir well-balanced cocktails like a Lychee-tini (vanilla-infused vodka, fresh lychees, lychee liqueur and lemon juice) in vintage glassware, while a DJ spins vinyl (mainly soul and funk) in the corner.
D9 AL POBLENOUSPORTS BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 309 92 02; www.denou.bar; Carrer de Pallars 122; h6pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mBogatell)
Eye-catching D9 draws a sports-minded crowd, with a long, colourfully lit bar, table football, outdoor seating and a big screen showing key football matches. The drinks menu includes 25 house-creation shots, as well as tropical cocktails and local wines.
GUINGUETA DEL BOGATELLBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Platja del Bogatell; h9am-10.30pm May-Sep; mLlacuna)
At this summertime spot, you can dig your feet in the sand and enjoy a cold brew, cocktail or fruity glass of sangría while watching the lapping waves.
BHARMABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.bharma.com; Carrer de Pere IV 93; h7am-11pm Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri, 10pm-3am Sat, closed Aug; mLlacuna)
Wildly configured, this El Poblenou bar pays homage to the famously addictive American TV series, Lost. Its stone-lined interior is reminiscent of the bunker-like ‘hatch’, save for the tail end of a plane wreck embedded in one wall. The drink of choice is Bharma Initiative beer, an (almost) exact duplication of the show’s Dharma logo.
3ENTERTAINMENT

SALA MONASTERIOLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %616 287197; www.facebook.com/sala.monasterio; Moll de Mestral 30; tickets vary; h10pm-5am Sun-Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat; mCiutadella Vila Olímpica)
Overlooking the bobbing masts and slender palm trees of Port Olímpic, this pocket-sized music spot stages an eclectic line-up of live bands, including jazz, forró (music from northeastern Brazil), blues jams and rock.
RAZZMATAZZLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 320 82 00; www.salarazzmatazz.com; Carrer de Pamplona 88; tickets from €17; h9pm-4am; mBogatell)
Bands from far and wide occasionally create scenes of near hysteria in this, one of the city’s classic live-music and clubbing venues. Bands can appear throughout the week (check the website), with different start times. On weekends live music later gives way to club sounds.
Five different clubs in one huge post-industrial space attract people of all dance persuasions and ages. The main space, the Razz Club, is a haven for the latest international rock and indie acts. The Loft does house and electro, while the Pop Bar offers anything from garage to soul. The Lolita Room is the land of house, hip-hop and dubstep, and upstairs in the Rex Room club-goers sweat it out to experimental sounds. You can save a few euros by purchasing tickets to concerts in advance online.
L’AUDITORICLASSICAL MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 247 93 00; www.auditori.cat; Carrer de Lepant 150; tickets free-€59; hbox office 5-9pm Tue-Fri, 10am-1pm & 5-9pm Sat; mMarina)
Barcelona’s modern home for the Orquestra Simfònica de Barcelona i Nacional de Catalunya, L’Auditori puts on plenty of orchestral, chamber, religious and other music. Designed by Rafael Moneo and opened in 1999, the main auditorium can accommodate over 2000 concertgoers. The Museu de la Música is located in the same building.
TEATRE NACIONAL DE CATALUNYAPERFORMING ARTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 306 57 00; www.tnc.cat; Plaça de les Arts 1; tickets free-€28; hbox office 3-7pm Wed, 4-8pm Thu-Sat, 4-6pm Sun; mGlòries)
The National Theatre of Catalonia hosts a wide range of performances, including dramas, comedies, musicals and dance in this ultra-neoclassical theatre designed by Barcelona architect Ricardo Bofill, which opened in 1996. Performances are in Catalan.
YELMO CINES ICÀRIACINEMA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %902 220922; www.yelmocines.es; Carrer de Salvador Espriu 61; tickets adult/child €9.90/7.30; mCiutadella Vila Olímpica)
This vast cinema complex shows films in the original language on 15 screens, making for plenty of choice. Aside from the screens, you’ll find several cheerful places to eat, bars and the like to keep you occupied before and after the movies.
SALA BECKETTTHEATRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 284 53 12; www.salabeckett.cat; Carrer de Pere IV 228-232; tickets from €3; mPoblenou)
One of the city’s principal alternative theatres, the Sala Beckett doesn’t shy away from challenging theatre, and stages an eclectic mix of productions. Performances are primarily in Catalan. Formerly based in Gràcia, the theatre moved in 2016 to this lovely space in a historic 1920s building.
7 SHOPPING

ELS ENCANTS VELLSMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Fira de Bellcaire; %93 246 30 30; www.encantsbcn.com; Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes; h9am-8pm Mon, Wed, Fri & Sat; mGlòries)
In a gleaming open-sided complex near Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes, the ‘Old Charms’ flea market is the biggest of its kind in Barcelona. Over 500 vendors ply their wares beneath massive mirror-like panels. It’s all here, from antique furniture through to secondhand clothes. There’s a lot of junk, but you’ll occasionally stumble across a ganga (bargain).
Catch some behind-the-scenes action from 7am to 9am on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, when the subastas (auctions) take place.
VERNITACHILDREN’S CLOTHING
(%625 092341; www.facebook/vernitastudioshop; Carrer del Joncar 27; h10am-1.30pm & 5-8pm Tue-Fri, 10am-2pm & 5-8pm Sat; mPoblenou)
Three mothers, Neli, Laura and Nacha, design and hand-stitch children’s clothing and accessories such as animal-print cushions, bags, kids’ jewellery, bow ties, towels (including adorable dinosaur designs) and washable nappies as well as soft cuddly toys at this light, bright studio-boutique. During the evenings, they also offer sewing lessons and origami workshops for kids (English available).
SYSTEM ACTIONCLOTHING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 463 85 82; www.systemaction.es; Carrer de Pere IV 122; h10am-7pm Fri & Sat; mLlacuna)
If you like discovering local producers, track down this outlet store on Carrer de Pere IV. Though System Action has stores across Catalonia (and in Madrid), its design headquarters are a few blocks south in a former Poblenou ice factory. Fashions are feminine but rugged, and you’ll find good basics here including very wearable sweaters, skirts, scarves and shoes.
ULTRA-LOCAL RECORDSMUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %661 017638; www.ultralocalrecords.com; Carrer de Pujades 113; h4-8.30pm Mon-Fri, 11am-8.30pm Sat; mLlacuna)
Along a fairly empty stretch of El Poblenou, this small, well-curated shop sells mostly used records (plus some re-releases and albums by current indie rock darlings) from Catalan, Spanish, French, American and British artists. Vinyl aside, you’ll find a smaller CD selection, plus zines and a few other curiosities. There’s a €1 bargain bin in front of the store.
LA BAZARTFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %633 455378; www.labazart.com; Carrer de la Ciutat de Granada 44; h10.30am-6pm Mon, Tue, Thu & Fri, to 2.30pm Sat; mLlacuna)
If you can’t make it to a handicrafts market in South America, La Bazart may be your next best bet. This colourfully decorated shop stocks handcrafted goods from across the Andes. There are lots of great gift ideas, including silver jewellery from Ecuador, woven pillowcases from Bolivia, and alpaca gloves, scarves and blankets from the owner’s native Chile.
MERCAT DE LA BARCELONETAMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 64 71; www.mercatdelabarceloneta.com; Plaça de la Font 1; h7am-2pm Mon-Thu & Sat, to 8pm Fri, to 3pm Sun; mBarceloneta) Set in a modern glass and steel building fronting a long plaza in the heart of Barceloneta, this airy market has seasonal produce and seafood stalls, as well as several places where you can enjoy a sit-down meal. EL GUINDILLA MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 221 54 58; Plaça del Poeta Boscà 2; tapas €5-11, mains €10-16; h9.30am-1am Sun-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat)
deserves special mention for its good-value lunch specials and outdoor seating on the plaza.
CENTRE COMERCIAL DE LES GLÒRIESMALL
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.lesglories.com; Avinguda Diagonal 208; h9am-9pm Mon, Tue, Thu & Fri, to 10pm Wed, to 9.30pm Sat; mGlòries)
A huge supermarket is among this mall’s 77 shops. Also here are 27 places to eat and a cinema complex.
CENTRE COMERCIAL DIAGONAL MARMALL
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 567 76 37; www.diagonalmarcentre.es; Avinguda Diagonal 3; h9.30am-10pm Mon-Sat Jun-Sep, 9am-9pm Mon-Sat Oct-May; mEl Maresme Fòrum)
This massive shopping centre has some 200 stores, plus restaurants and cinemas.
WATERFRONT MARKETS

On weekends Port Vell springs to life with markets selling a mix of antiques and contemporary art and crafts at key points along the waterfront.
Port Antic MAP GOOGLE MAP; (www.portvellbcn.com; Plaça del Portal de la Pau; h10am-8pm Sat & Sun; mDrassanes) At the base of La Rambla; antiques and bric-a-brac.
Feria d’Artesanía del Palau de Mar MAP GOOGLE MAP; (www.portvellbcn.com; Moll del Dipòsit; h11am-8.30pm Sat & Sun Sep-Jun, daily Jul & Aug; mBarceloneta) Near the Palau de Mar; arts and crafts.
Mercado de Pintores MAP GOOGLE MAP; (Passeig d’Ítaca; h10am-8pm Sat & Sun; mDrassanes) Reached by the pedestrian-only Rambla de Mar; art fair with diverse paintings.
2SPORTS & ACTIVITIES

MOLOKAI SUP CENTERWATER SPORTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 48 68; www.molokaisupcenter.com; Carrer de Meer 39; 2hr private lesson €60, SUP rental per hour €15; mBarceloneta)
This respected outfit will give you a crash course in stand-up paddleboarding (SUP). In addition to the two-hour beginner’s class, Molokai can help you improve your technique (in intermediate and advanced lessons – all in two-hour blocks); gear and wetsuits are included. If you’d rather just hire a SUP board, staff can get you out on the sea in no time.

ORSOMCRUISE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 441 05 37; www.barcelona-orsom.com; Moll de les Drassanes; adult/child €15.50/13.50; hMay-early Oct; mDrassanes)
Orsom’s large sailing catamaran makes the 90-minute journey to Port Olímpic and back. There are up to four departures per day; the last of the day is a jazz cruise.
BASE NAUTICA MUNICIPALWATER SPORTS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 04 32; www.basenautica.org; Avinguda de Litoral; 2hr lessons from €40, equipment hire per hour from €20, wetsuit hire per day €10; h10am-7pm; mPoblenou)
Just back from Platja de la Mar Bella, at Base Nautica Municipal you can learn the basics of kayaking, windsurfing, catamaran sailing or stand-up paddleboarding. You can also hire equipment here. Prices for lessons are cheaper in groups of two or more. Longer courses, running from eight to 12 hours over several days, are also available.
CLUB NATACIÓ ATLÈTIC-BARCELONASWIMMING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 221 00 10; www.cnab.cat; Plaça del Mar; day pass adult/child €12.55/7.15; h7am-11pm Mon-Fri, to 10pm Sat, to 8pm Sun; gV15, 39, 59, 64, mBarceloneta)
Operating since 1907, this athletic club has one indoor and two outdoor pools. Of the latter, one is heated for lap swimming in winter. Admission includes use of the gym, spa and private beach access.







La Sagrada Família & L’Eixample

L’ESQUERRA DE L’EIXAMPLE | LA DRETA DE L’EIXAMPLE
Neighbourhood Top Five

5 Recinte Modernista de Sant Pau Admiring this lesser-known masterpiece of Modernisme, a Unesco-listed former hospital designed by Domènech i Montaner.

Local Life
AStudent life Join students from the Universitat de Barcelona at the string of unpretentious hang-outs nearby on the Carrer d’Enric Granados.
ASay it with flowers Walking around the Flores Navarro, a cathedral to colourful plant life, is quite a trip at 4am.
Getting There & Away
ATrain FGC lines from Plaça de Catalunya take you one stop to Provença, in the heart of L’Eixample.

5 Best Places to Eat
ADisfrutar
AMont Bar
AAuto Rosellon
ATapas 24
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
ANapar BCN
AMonvínic
AMilano
ALes Gens Que J’Aime 
For reviews, see here.
7 Best Places to Shop
AJoan Múrria
AFlores Navarro
ACacao Sampaka
For reviews, see here.

1SIGHTS

SALA FUNDACIÓN MAPFREGALLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 401 26 03; www.fundacionmapfre.org; Carrer de la Diputació 250; adult/child €3/free, Mon free; h2-8pm Mon, 10am-8pm Tue-Sat, 11am-7pm Sun; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Formerly the Fundación Francisco Godia, this stunning, carefully restored Modernista residence was taken over in late 2015 by the charitable cultural arm of Spanish insurance giants MAPFRE as a space for art and photography exhibitions. Housed in the Casa Garriga i Nogués, it is a stunning, carefully restored Modernista residence originally built for a rich banking family by Enric Sagnier in 1902–05.
Exhibitions are shown on the ground floor and in a number of small rooms up the curvaceous marble stairway. Look out for the fine Modernista stained-glass windows in room 8. An audioguide costs €3.50.
CASA LLEÓ MORERAARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Passeig de Gràcia 35; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Domènech i Montaner’s 1905 contribution to the Illa de la Discòrdia, with Modernista carving outside and a bright, tiled lobby in which floral motifs predominate, is perhaps the least odd-looking of the three main buildings on the block. Luxury fashion store Loewe is located here.
PALAU ROBERTGALLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 238 80 91; http://palaurobert.gencat.cat; Passeig de Gràcia 107; h9am-8pm Mon-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun; mDiagonal) F
Catalonia’s regional tourist office also serves as an exhibition space, mostly for shows with Catalan themes. In summer, concerts are occasionally held in the peaceful gardens at the back of the 1903-completed building, or in its main hall.
CASA GOLFERICHSCULTURAL CENTRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 323 77 90; www.golferichs.org; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 491; h10am-10pm Mon-Fri, to 2pm Sat; mRocafort)
This quirky mansion is an oddity of another era on one of the city’s busiest boulevards, a Modernista villa owned by businessman Macari Golferichs. Brick, ceramics and wood are the main building elements of the house, which displays a distinctly Gothic flavour. It came close to demolition in the 1970s but was saved by the town hall and converted into a cultural centre. Opening times and prices can vary depending on temporary exhibitions, concerts and other activities.
UNIVERSITAT DE BARCELONAARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 402 11 00; www.ub.edu; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 585; h8am-8pm Mon-Fri; mUniversitat)
Although a university was first set up on what is now La Rambla in the 16th century, the present, glorious mix of (neo) Romanesque, Gothic, Islamic and Mudéjar architecture is a caprice of the 19th century (built 1863–82). Wander into the main hall, up the grand staircase and around the various leafy cloisters, or take a stroll in the rear gardens.
MUSEU DEL PERFUMMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 216 01 21; www.museudelperfum.com; Passeig de Gràcia 39; adult/child €5/free; h10.30am-8pm Mon-Fri, 11am-2pm Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
At the back of the Regia perfume store, this museum contains oddities from ancient Egyptian and Roman scent receptacles (the latter mostly from the 1st to 3rd centuries AD) to classic eau de cologne bottles – all in all, some 5000 bottles of infinite shapes, sizes and histories. Other items include ancient bronze Etruscan tweezers and little early-19th-century potpourri bowls made of fine Sèvres porcelain. Also on show are old catalogues and advertising posters.



1 La Dreta de L’Eixample
RECINTE MODERNISTA DE SANT PAUARCHITECTURE
(%93 553 78 01; www.santpaubarcelona.org; Carrer de Sant Antoni Maria Claret 167; adult/child €13/free; h9.30am-6.30pm Mon-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun Apr-Oct, 9.30am-4.30pm Mon-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun Nov-Mar; mSant Pau/Dos de Maig)
Domènech i Montaner outdid himself as architect and philanthropist with the Modernista Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau, renamed the ‘Recinte Modernista’ in 2014. It was long considered one of the city’s most important hospitals but was repurposed, its various spaces becoming cultural centres, offices and something of a monument. The complex, including 16 pavilions, is lavishly decorated and each pavilion is unique.
Domènech i Montaner wanted to create an environment that would also cheer up patients. Among artists who contributed statuary, ceramics and artwork was the prolific Eusebi Arnau.
Guided tours (adult/child €19/free) lasting 90 minutes are available in a variety of languages; English tours depart at 10.30am.
CASA DE LES PUNXESARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Casa Terrades; %93 016 01 28; www.casadelespunxes.com; Avinguda Diagonal 420; adult/child audiogude tour €12.50/11.25, guided tour €20/17; h9am-8pm; mDiagonal)
Puig i Cadafalch’s Casa Terrades, completed in 1905, is better known as the Casa de les Punxes (House of Spikes) because of its pointed turrets. Resembling a medieval castle, the former apartment block is the only fully detached building in L’Eixample, and was declared a national monument in 1976. Since 2017 it has been open to the public. Visits take in its stained-glass bay windows, handsome iron staircase, and rooftop. Guided tours in English lasting one hour depart at 4pm.
Various other tour options include a night-time tour with a glass of cava (€23).
PALAU DEL BARÓ QUADRASARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 467 80 00; www.llull.cat; Avinguda Diagonal 373; tour adult/child €10/free; h11am-1pm Wed; mDiagonal)
Puig i Cadafalch designed Palau del Baró Quadras (built 1902–06) in an exuberant Gothic-inspired style. The main facade is its most intriguing, with a soaring, glassed-in gallery. Take a closer look at the gargoyles and reliefs – the pair of toothy fish and the sword-wielding knight clearly have the same artistic signature as the architect behind Casa Amatller. The only way to visit the interior is on a 45-minute tour; English tours depart on Wednesday at 11am.
Decor inside is eclectic, but dominated by Middle Eastern and East Asian themes.
ESGLÉSIA DE LA PURÍSSIMA CONCEPCIÓ I ASSUMPCIÓ DE NOSTRA SENYORACHURCH
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 457 65 52; www.parroquiaconcepciobcn.org; Carrer de Roger de Llúria 70; h7.30am-1pm & 5-9pm Mon-Sat, 7.30am-2pm & 5-9pm Sun; mPasseig de Gràcia)
One hardly expects to run into a medieval church on the grid-pattern streets of the late-19th-century city extension, yet that is just what this is. Transferred stone by stone from the old centre in 1871–88, this 14th-century church has a pretty 16th-century cloister with a peaceful garden.
Behind is a Romanesque-Gothic bell tower (11th to 16th century), moved from another old town church that didn’t survive, Església de Sant Miquel. This is one of a handful of such old churches shifted willy-nilly from their original locations to L’Eixample.
FUNDACIÓ SUÑOLGALLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 496 10 32; www.fundaciosunol.org; Passeig de Gràcia 98; adult/child €4/free; h11am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Fri, 4-8pm Sat; mDiagonal)
Rotating exhibitions of portions of this private collection of mostly 20th-century art (some 1200 works in total) offer anything from Man Ray’s photography to sculptures by Alberto Giacometti. Over two floors, you are most likely to run into Spanish artists – anyone from Picasso to Jaume Plensa – along with a sprinkling of international artists.
It makes a refreshing pause between the crush of crowded Modernista monuments on this boulevard. Indeed, you get an interesting side view of one of them, La Pedrera, from out the back.
ESGLÉSIA DE LES SALESESCHURCH
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 458 76 67; www.parroquiaconcepciobcn.org; Passeig de Sant Joan 90; h10am-1pm & 5-7pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun; mVerdaguer)
A singular neo-Gothic effort, this church is interesting because it was designed by Joan Martorell i Montells (1833–1906), Gaudí’s architecture professor. Raised in 1878–85 with an adjacent convent (badly damaged in the civil war and now a school), it offers hints of what was to come with Modernisme, with his use of brick, mosaics and stained glass.
PALAU MONTANERARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 76 52; www.fundaciotapies.org; Carrer de Mallorca 278; adult/child €7/free; hby reservation; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Interesting on the outside and made all the more enticing by its gardens, this creation by Domènech i Montaner is spectacular on the inside. Completed in 1893, its central feature is a grand staircase beneath a broad, ornamental skylight. The interior is laden with sculptures (some by Eusebi Arnau), mosaics and fine woodwork. It is only open by two-hour guided tour, organised by the Fundació Tàpies (in English by prior request).


5EATING

5 L’Esquerra de L’Eixample
COPASETICCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 532 76 66; www.copaseticbarcelona.com; Carrer de la Diputació 55; mains €6-13.50; h10.30am-midnight Tue & Wed, to 1am Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat, to 5.30pm Sun; Wv; mRocafort)
Decked out with retro furniture, Copasetic has a fun, friendly vibe. The menu holds plenty for everyone, whether your thing is eggs Benedict, wild-berry tartlets or a fat, juicy burger. There are lots of vegetarian, gluten-free and organic options, and superb (and reasonably priced) weekend brunches. Lunch menús (Tuesday to Friday) cost between €9.50 and €12.
CREMERIA TOSCANAGELATO€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 539 38 25; www.cremeriatoscana.es; Carrer de Muntaner 161; ice cream €2.80-5.40; h1pm-midnight Mon-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat, noon-midnight Sun Apr-Oct, 1-9pm Tue-Thu, to 11pm Fri & Sat, noon-11pm Sun Nov-Mar; mHospital Clínic)
At the most authentic gelato outlet in town, all flavours are natural and most are gluten-free. Along with classic Italian choices such as creamy stracciatella and wavy hazelnut nocciola are more unusual offerings such as goat cheese and caramelised fig, pear and chocolate or plum and pink grapefruit. Buy a cone or a tub.
KOYUKIJAPANESE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 237 84 90; http://koyuki.eltenedor.rest; Carrer de Còrsega 242; mains €8-12; h1-3.30pm & 8-11pm Tue-Sun; dFGC Provença)
This unassuming basement Japanese diner is one of those rough-edged diamonds. Order from the menu complete with pictures courtesy of the Japanese owner – you won’t be disappointed. The variety of sashimi moriawase is generous and constantly fresh. The tempura udon is a particularly hearty noodle option with breaded shrimp.
Wash it all down with Sapporo beer.
CHARLOT CAFÈCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 451 15 65; Carrer d’Aribau 67; dishes €6.50-13.50; hkitchen 8.30am-10pm Mon-Fri, 7am-10pm Sat, bar to 3am Fri & Sat; Wv; dFGC Provença)
Movie stills and posters, from Breakfast at Tiffany’s to Pulp Fiction, line the walls at Charlot. Get a morning kick-start with a truffled tortilla española (Spanish omelette) or eggs baked in Iberian ham, or drop by for lunch (sautéed quinoa salad; burgers with hand-cut fries) or dinner (duck with blackberry sauce). Craft beers and cocktails are all-day-long options.
Twists on classics include a burnt pineapple caipirinha, smoked red pepper Bloody Mary, or white chocolate and cardamom mudslide.
MAURIBAKERY€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 10 20; www.pasteleriasmauri.com; Rambla de Catalunya 102; pastries €3.50-6.50; h8am-midnight Mon-Fri, 9am-10pm Sat, 9am-4.30pm Sun; mDiagonal)
Ever since it opened in 1929, this grand old pastry shop and teahouse has dazzled its regular customers with its spectacular sweets, chocolate croissants and gourmet delicatessen items. Dining on the terrace incurs a surcharge of €2 per dish.
CRUSTOBAKERY€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 487 05 51; www.crusto.es; Carrer de València 246; pastries €3-5.50; h7.30am-9pm Mon-Fri, 8.30am-9pm Sat, 9am-3pm Sun; W; mPasseig de Gràcia)
A French-inspired bakery and pastry shop, Crusto’s aromas of freshly baked bread, baguettes, croissants and countless pastries will be enough to convince you that it’s worth pulling up a stool here for breakfast or weekend brunch.
CAFÉ SAN TELMOCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 439 17 09; www.gruposantelmo.com; Carrer de Buenos Aires 60; mains €8-13.50; h8.30am-2am Mon-Wed, 8.30am-3am Thu-Sat, 9am-1am Sun; W; mHospital Clínic)
Framed by big windows, this stylish corner cafe serves hearty breakfasts, sandwiches (such as Spanish roast beef and mustard or Milanese chicken with tomato and Brie), ‘eco-burgers’ (like the Palermo, with beef, mozzarella, pesto and herb mayo), salads and the like, along with a great list of gin and tonics.
EL RINCÓN MAYAMEXICAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 451 39 46; Carrer de València 183; mains €6-10; h9pm-midnight Mon, 1.30-4pm & 8.30pm-midnight Tue-Sat; W; mUniversitat)
Getting a seat in this modest, warm and simple Mexican eatery can be a trial but it’s worth it. Pocket-sized serves of nachos, guacamole and fajitas all burst with flavour, as do the tacos de pibil (pork tacos).
The owner-chef spent much of his life in the restaurant business in Mexico City.
AMALTEAVEGETARIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 454 86 13; www.restauranteamaltea.com; Carrer de la Diputació 164; set menus day €8.90-10.90, evening €15.90; h1-4pm & 8-11pm Mon-Thu, 1-4pm & 8-11.45pm Fri & Sat; Wv; mUrgell)
Framed by a fresco of blue sky, this vegetarian eatery serves simple menús del día (daily set menus) and two-course evening meals. Most mains (curries, stews, roast veggies) are accompanied by rice.
oAUTO ROSELLONINTERNATIONAL€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 853 93 20; www.autorosellon.com; Carrer de Rosselló 182; mains €12-18; h8am-1am Mon-Wed, 8am-2am Thu & Fri, 9am-2am Sat, 9am-midnight Sun; Wv; dFGC Provença) S
With cornflower-blue paintwork and all its fresh produce on display, Auto Rosellon utilises mostly organic ingredients sourced from small producers and its own garden in dishes like eggs Benedict, salmon tartare with avocado, ricotta gnocchi with confit tomatoes and thyme, and slow-roasted pork tacos. Homemade juices and rose lemonade are exceptional; there are also great cocktails and craft beers.
PARKING PIZZAPIZZA€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 633 96 45; www.parkingpizza.com; Carrer de Londres 98; pizza €9.50-14.50; h1-4pm & 8-11pm Mon-Sat, 1-4pm Sun; dFGC Provença)
In this garage-style space, you might well have to share a long unvarnished wooden table, squeezed in on a cardboard box stool. The wood-fired pizzas more than make up for any forced intimacy, however, as do the starters, which include a creamy burrata ‘stracciatella’ and a superb red quinoa salad with guacamole and a poached egg.
LA BODEGUETA PROVENÇATAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 17 25; www.provenca.labodegueta.cat; Carrer de Provença 233; tapas €6-15, mains €9.50-16; h7am-1.45am Mon-Fri, 8am-1.45am Sat, 1pm-12.45am Sun; W; dFGC Provença)
The ‘Little Wine Cellar’ offers classic tapas presented with a touch of class, from calamares a la andaluza (lightly battered squid rings) to cecina (dried cured veal meat). The house speciality is ous estrellats (literally ‘smashed eggs’) – a mix of scrambled egg white, egg yolk, potato and ingredients ranging from foie gras to morcilla (black pudding).
Pair it with a good Ribera del Duero or caña (little glass) of beer. A lunchtime menú is €15.
CERVESERIA CATALANATAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 216 03 68; Carrer de Mallorca 236; tapas €3-14; h9am-1.30am; dFGC Provença)
The ‘Catalan Brewery’ is perfect at all hours: for a morning coffee and croissant, or sangria, montaditos (canapés) and tapas at lunch or dinner. You can sit at the bar, on the pavement terrace or in the restaurant at the back. The variety of hot tapas, salads and other snacks draws a well-dressed crowd. No reservations.
CERVESERIA BRASSERIA GALLEGASEAFOOD€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 177 07 29; Carrer de Casanova 238; mains €9.50-19.50; h1.30-4pm & 9pm-midnight Mon-Sat, closed Aug; W; mHospital Clínic)
You could walk right by this modest establishment without giving it a second glance. If you did, you’d notice it was chock-full of locals immersed in animated banter and surrounded by plates of abundant Galician classics. The fresh pulpo a la gallega (spicy octopus chunks with potatoes) as a starter marks this place as a cut above the competition.
The setting is simple, the meat dishes succulent and the fideuà (Catalan-style paella with vermicelli noodles as the base) full of seafood flavour.
EL VELÓDROMOTAPAS, MEDITERRANEAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 430 60 22; www.moritz.com; Carrer de Muntaner 213; tapas €2.50-10.50, mains €9.50-24; hkitchen 1pm-1am, bar 24hr; W; mHospital Clínic)
The restoration of this history-steeped literary tavern by Barcelona brewer Moritz brought back a wonderfully atmospheric establishment. Stop in for an aperitif and tapas or more substantial dishes such as salmon with caramelised cabbage or veal meatballs with fresh tomato and mozzarella. The spectacular high-ceilinged space retains many of its original art deco fittings.
SHIBUIJAPANESE€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 321 90 04; www.shibuirestaurantes.com; Carrer del Comte d’Urgell 272; mains €13-28; h1-3.45pm & 8.30-11pm; W; mHospital Clínic)
Shibui is where discerning sushi-loving locals come to dine on quality Japanese food. Go for the sushi and sashimi ‘platters’, which are served in wicker boats, Japanese style.
CU-CUT!SPANISH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 667 79 69; www.cu-cut.cat; Carrer d’Enric Granados 68; mains €9-13; h10am-2am; dFGC Provença)
Named after a popular Catalan satirical magazine from the early 19th century, Cu-Cut! is a beautiful beamed tavern with a large covered porch out front, a timber bar and a long, romantically lit dining room. There are dishes from all over Spain and further afield, including octopus a feira (with paprika), roast Iberian pork and hake ceviche.
TAKTIKA BERRIPINTXOS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 453 47 59; Carrer de València 169; pintxos €4-15.50, mains €12-28; h1-4pm & 8.30-11pm Mon-Fri, 1-4pm Sat, closed early-late Aug; W; mHospital Clínic)
Reservations are essential at Taktika Berri, which teems with diners here for some of the best pintxos (Basque tapas) in town. Morsels like blood sausage or bacalao (salt cod) with potato gratin are snapped up as soon as they arrive from the kitchen, so keep your eyes peeled.
oDISFRUTARMODERN EUROPEAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 348 68 96; www.en.disfrutarbarcelona.com; Carrer de Villarroel 163; tasting menus €120-185; h1-2.45pm & 8-9.45pm Tue-Sat; mHospital Clínic)
Disfrutar (‘Enjoy’ in Catalan) is among the city’s finest restaurants, with two Michelin stars. Run by alumni of Ferran Adrià’s game-changing (now closed) El Bulli restaurant, nothing is as it seems, such as black and green olives that are actually chocolate ganache with orange-blossom water.
The decor is fabulously on point, with latticed brickwork and trademark geometric ceramics from Catalan design team Equipo Creativo, and the service is faultless.
oMONT BARBISTRO€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 323 95 90; www.montbar.com; Carrer de la Diputació 220; tapas €2-13, mains €12.50-26.50; hnoon-3.30pm & 7pm-midnight; mUniversitat)
Named for the owner’s Val d’Aran hometown, this stylish wine-bar-style space with black-and-white floors, forest-green banquette and bottle-lined walls offers next-level cooking. Exquisite tapas (pig’s trotters with baby shrimp; plankton meringue with sea anemone and Mascarpone) precede ‘small plate’ mains (tuna belly with pine-nut emulsion) and showstopping desserts (sheep’s milk ice cream with blackcurrant liqueur sauce). Reservations essential.
Stunning wines (over 250 varieties) span all price points.
CINC SENTITSINTERNATIONAL€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 323 94 90; www.cincsentits.com; Carrer d’Aribau 58; tasting menus €100-120; h1.30-2.30pm & 8.30-9.30pm Tue-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Enter the realm of the ‘Five Senses’ to indulge in a jaw-dropping tasting menu consisting of a series of small, experimental dishes (there is no à la carte, although dishes can be tweaked to suit diners’ requests). The use of fresh local produce, such as Costa Brava line-caught fish and top-quality Extremadura suckling pig, is key.
Also key is the kind of creative genius that has earned chef Jordi Artal a Michelin star. A lunch menú is available for €55.
SPEAKEASYINTERNATIONAL€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 50 80; www.drymartiniorg.com; Carrer d’Aribau 162; mains €18.50-28; h8-11pm Mon-Sat; dFGC Provença)
This clandestine restaurant lurks behind the Dry Martini bar. You will be shown a door through the open kitchen area to the ‘storeroom’, lined with hundreds of bottles of backlit, quality tipples. Tempting menu options might include prawn ravioli with Parmesan crème or venison with braised celery.
Dark decor, a few works of art, low lighting and light jazz complement the smooth service.
MONVÍNICSPANISH€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 272 61 87; www.monvinic.com; Carrer de la Diputació 249; mains €17-36; h1.30-3.30pm & 8-10.30pm Tue-Fri, 8-10.30pm Mon & Sat; mPasseig de Gracia) S
Opening to a leafy, table-filled garden, this is the ‘espacio culinario’ of world-famous wine emporium Monvínic. The menu offers elaborate confections such as sea urchin and lobster consommé, chargrilled duck with red-wine-poached pears or langoustine ravioli. Its ingredients, wine and building materials are all sourced from Catalonia.
Designed by Alfons Tost, the sustainable space has air-purifying plants, energy-efficient LED lighting, and a water and food recycling system.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
PLATJA DE L’EIXAMPLE

In a hidden garden inside a typical Eixample block is an old water tower and an urban ‘beach’, the Platja de l’Eixample MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 423 43 50; Carrer de Roger de Llúria 56; €1.55; h10am-8pm late Jun–Sep; mGirona). In reality, this is a knee-height swimming pool (60cm at its deepest) surrounded by sand. It’s perfect for little ones, with lifeguards on hand.
5 La Dreta de L’Eixample
oTAPAS 24TAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 488 09 77; www.carlesabellan.com; Carrer de la Diputació 269; tapas €2.20-12; h9am-midnight; W; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Hotshot chef Carles Abellán runs this basement tapas haven known for its gourmet versions of old faves. Highlights include the bikini (toasted ham and cheese sandwich – here the ham is cured and the truffle makes all the difference) and zesty boquerones al limón (lemon-marinated anchovies). You can’t book but it’s worth the wait.
For dessert, choose xocolata amb pa, sal i oli (delicious balls of chocolate in olive oil with a touch of salt and wafer).
HAWKER 45ASIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 763 83 15; Carrer de Casp 45; mains €8.50-16; h1-4pm & 8-11pm Mon-Fri, 12.30-4pm & 8-11.30pm Sat, 12.30-4pm Sun; mTetuan)
Taking its cues from an Asian hawkers market, this aromatic spot sizzles up street-food dishes such as spicy Malaysian squid laksa, Indonesian lamb satay, Korean Kalbi pork ribs with rice cakes, Thai crying tiger beef salad and Singaporean green mango sambal with steamed crab. Its six-course tasting menu (€35) is best paired with craft beers (€42) or Asian-inspired cocktails (€60).
Dine at the long, red bar overlooking the open kitchen or head out the back to the cavernous postindustrial dining space with bare beams and ventilation pipes.
GRANJA PETITBOMEDITERRANEAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 265 65 03; www.granjapetitbo.com; Passeig de Sant Joan 82; sandwiches €4-8, mains €8-12; h9am-11pm Mon-Wed, 9am-11.30pm Thu & Fri, 10am-11.30pm Sat, 10am-5pm Sun; W; mGirona)
High ceilings, battered leather armchairs and dramatic flower arrangements set the tone in this sunny little corner cafe, beloved of local hipsters and young families. As well as an all-day parade of homemade cakes, freshly squeezed juices and superior coffee, there are burgers, salads and pastas, along with a brunch menu on weekends.
CANTINA MEXICANAMEXICAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 667 66 68; www.cantinalamexicana.es; Carrer de València 427; mains €7-13; h1pm-midnight; v; mSagrada Família)
Just far enough from La Sagrada Família to dodge the crowds, this simply decorated spot serves authentic Mexican fare, including over 20 different corn or flour tacos (such as sautéed shrimp and beans), cochinita pibil (traditional slow-roasted pork seasoned with annatto seeds) and four styles of ceviche. Vegetarian options include a delicious pumpkin-flower quesadilla.
MR KAODIM SUM€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 445 25 88; www.misterkao.com; Carrer de València 271; dim sum €2.80-4, mains €11-28; h12.30-3.30pm & 8.30-11.30pm Tue-Sat, 12.30-3.30pm Sun; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Within the grand Hotel Claris, this elegant Shanghai-style dim sum restaurant serves top-flight dumplings. They’re not cheap, but every bite is a joy; the jiao zi with pig’s trotters are especially good, as are the siu mai with langoustines and trout roe. More substantial dishes include Peking duck and noodles with wild mushrooms, poached egg and truffles.
ENTREPANES DÍAZSANDWICHES€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 415 75 82; Carrer de Pau Claris 189; sandwiches €6-10, tapas €3-10; h1pm-midnight; mDiagonal)
Gourmet sandwiches, from roast beef to suckling pig or crispy squid with squid-ink aioli, are the highlight at this sparkling old-style bar, along with sharing plates of Spanish specialities such as sea urchins and prawn fritters or blood-sausage croquettes. The policy of only hiring experienced waiters over 50 lends a certain gravitas to the operation and some especially charming service.
Black-and-white photos of Barcelona line the walls.
CHICHA LIMONÁMEDITERRANEAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 277 64 03; www.chichalimona.com; Passeig de Sant Joan 80; mains €12-17; h9.30am-1am Tue-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat, to 5pm Sun; W; mTetuan)
Passeig de Sant Joan is a hipster hot spot, and bright, bustling Chicha Limoná has provided them with somewhere great to eat. Steak tartare with yuzu dressing, rabbit tacos, yoghurt-marinated salmon and tequila, mango and chilli sorbet are among the oft-changing dishes (set menu €13.90), along with steaming pizza.
CAN KENJIJAPANESE€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 476 18 23; www.cankenji.com; Carrer del Rosselló 325; mains €10-14; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm; mVerdaguer)
The chef of this understated little izakaya (the Japanese version of a tavern) gets his ingredients fresh from the city’s markets, with traditional Japanese recipes receiving a Mediterranean touch. Choices include sardine tempura with an aubergine, miso and anchovy purée, or tataki (lightly grilled meat) of bonito (tuna) with salmorejo (a Cordoban cold tomato and bread soup).
CASA ALFONSOSPANISH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 97 83; www.casaalfonso.com; Carrer de Roger de Llúria 6; tapas & sandwiches €4-15, mains €13-23; h8am-1am Mon-Fri, 1pm-1am Sat; W; mUrquinaona)
In business since 1934, Casa Alfonso is perfect for a morning coffee or a tapas stop at the long marble bar. Wood-panelled and festooned with old photos, posters and swinging hams, it attracts a faithful local clientele at all hours for its flautas (thin baguettes with a choice of fillings), hams, cheeses, hot dishes and homemade desserts.
There are also more substantial dishes, mostly involving grilled meat. Consider rounding off with an alfonsito (miniature Irish coffee).
CASA AMALIACATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 458 94 58; www.casamaliabcn.com; Passatge del Mercat 4-6; mains €9-20; h1-3.30pm & 9-10.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-3.30pm Sun; mGirona)
This very local split-level restaurant is popular for its hearty Catalan cooking that uses fresh produce from the busy market next door. On Thursdays during winter it offers the mountain classic, escudella (Catalan stew). Otherwise, try light variations on local cuisine like the bacallà al allioli de poma (cod in apple-based aioli sauce). The three-course menú del día is a bargain at €15.50.
CAFE EMMABISTRO€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 12 16; www.cafe-emma.com; Carrer de Pau Claris 142; mains €14-25.50; h8am-10.30pm Mon-Fri, 9am-10.30pm Sat & Sun; W; mPasseig de Grácia)
French-inspired Cafe Emma combines local and international influences, though wines are sourced solely from France. It’s a superb bet for all-day dining on its terrace, in its dining room or at its bar. Tartines (open sandwiches), such as goat cheese, beetroot and roast beef, are excellent. Don’t miss the freshly shucked oysters with a crisp glass of white in season.
EMBATMEDITERRANEAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 458 08 55; Carrer de Mallorca 304; mains €10.50-21; h1-3.45pm Mon-Wed, 1-3.45pm & 8.30-11pm Thu-Sat; W; mVerdaguer)
Enthusiastic young chefs turn out beautifully presented dishes in this bright, Scandinavian-style setting. Indulge perhaps in raviolis de pollo amb bacon i calabassó (chicken ravioli in a sauce of finely chopped bacon, courgette and other vegetables) followed by melt-in-the-mouth lluç amb pa amb tomàquet, carxofes i maionesa de peres (thick-cut hake on tomato-drenched bread, with artichoke slices and pear mayonnaise).
DE TAPA MADRECATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 459 31 34; www.detapamadre.com; Carrer de Mallorca 301; tapas €4-7.50, mains €14-25.50; h11.30am-midnight; mVerdaguer)
A lively atmosphere greets you from the moment you swing open the door. A few tiny tables line the window (there’s also terrace seating out front), but head upstairs for more space in the gallery, which hovers above the array of tapas on the bar below. The arròs amb llamàntol (a hearty rice dish with lobster) is delicious.
CASA CALVETCATALAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 412 40 12; www.casacalvet.es; Carrer de Casp 48; mains €27-35; h1-3.30pm & 8-10.30pm Mon-Sat; mUrquinaona)
An early Gaudí masterpiece loaded with his trademark curvy features houses a swish restaurant (just to the right of the building’s main entrance). Dress up and ask for an intimate taula cabina (wooden booth). You could opt for scallop- and prawn-stuffed artichokes, partridge and chestnut casserole or veal with duck-liver sauce.
A four-course lunch menu costs €38, while a five-course dinner menu is €59.
PATAGONIA BEEF & WINESOUTH AMERICAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 304 37 35; www.patagoniabw.com; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 660; mains €20-38; h1.30-3.30pm & 7-11pm Mon-Thu, to 11.30pm Fri & Sat, to 10.30pm Sun; W; mPasseig de Gràcia)
This stylish restaurant delivers on its promise of an Argentinian meat-fest. Start with empanadas (small pastries with various meat fillings), then head for a hearty main, such as a juicy beef medallón con salsa de colmenillas (a medallion in a morel sauce) or such classics as the bife de chorizo (sirloin strip) or Brazilian picanha (rump).
You can choose from one of five side dishes to accompany your pound of flesh.
2Neighbourhood Walk
More Modernisme in L’Eixample

START CASA CALVET
END CASA MACAYA
LENGTH 4KM; ONE HOUR
Gaudí’s most conventional contribution to L’Eixample is 1Casa Calvet, built in 1900. Inspired by baroque, the noble ashlar facade is broken up by protruding wrought-iron balconies. Inside, the main attraction is the staircase, which you can admire if you eat in the swanky restaurant.
2Casa Enric Batlló was completed in 1896 by Josep Vilaseca (1848–1910), part of the Comtes de Barcelona hotel. The brickwork facade is especially graceful when lit up at night.
Puig i Cadafalch let his imagination loose on 3Casa Serra (1903–08), a neo-Gothic whimsy that is today home to government offices. With its central tower topped by a conical roof, grandly decorated upper-floor windows and tiled roof, you’ll find yourself pondering what a strange house it must have been to live in for its former residents.
4Casa Comalatis, built in 1911 by Salvador Valeri (1873–1954), is similarly striking. Note Gaudí’s obvious influence on the main facade, with its wavy roof and bulging balconies. Head around the back to Carrer de Còrsega to see a more playful facade, with its windows stacked like cards.
Completed in 1912, 5Casa Thomas was one of Domènech i Montaner’s earlier efforts – the floral motifs and reptile figurines are trademarks and the massive ground-level wrought-iron decoration (and protection?) is magnificent. Wander inside to the Cubiña design store to admire his interior work including brick columns.
6Casa Llopis i Bofill is an interesting block of flats designed by Antoni Gallissà (1861–1903) in 1902. The graffiti-covered facade is particularly striking to the visitor’s eye. The use of elaborate parabolic arches on the ground floor is a clear Modernista touch, as are the wrought-iron balconies.
Puig i Cadafalch’s 7Casa Macaya (1901) has a wonderful courtyard and features the typical playful, pseudo-Gothic decoration that characterises many of the architect’s projects. It belongs to La Caixa bank and is occasionally used for temporary exhibitions, when visitors are permitted to enter.
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

6 L’Esquerra de L’Eixample
DRY MARTINIBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 50 80; www.drymartiniorg.com; Carrer d’Aribau 162-166; h1pm-2.30am Mon-Fri, 6.30pm-2.30am Sat & Sun; dFGC Provença)
Waiters make expert cocktail suggestions, but the house drink, taken at the bar or on one of the plush green banquettes, is always a good bet. The gin and tonic comes in an enormous mug-sized glass – one will take you most of the night.
Out the back hides a superb restaurant, Speakeasy.
oMILANOCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 112 71 50; www.camparimilano.com; Ronda de la Universitat 35; hnoon-3am; mCatalunya)
Completely invisible from street level, this gem of hidden Barcelona nightlife is a subterranean old-school cocktail bar with velvet banquettes and glass-fronted cabinets, presided over by white-jacketed waiters. Live music (Cuban, jazz, blues, flamenco and swing) plays nightly; a DJ takes over after 11pm. Fantastic cocktails include the Picasso (tequila, honey, absinthe and lemon) and six different Bloody Marys.
oMONVÍNICWINE BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 272 61 87; www.monvinic.com; Carrer de la Diputació 249; h1-11pm Tue-Fri, 7-11pm Mon & Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia) S
At this rhapsody to wine, the digital wine list details more than 3000 international varieties searchable by origin, year or grape. Some 50 selections are available by the glass; you can, of course, order by the bottle too. There is an emphasis on affordability, but if you want to splash out, there are fantastic vintage options.
oNAPAR BCNBREWERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 408 91 62; www.naparbcn.com; Carrer de la Diputació 223; h5pm-midnight Tue & Wed, to 1am Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat; W; mUniversitat)
A standout on Barcelona’s burgeoning craft-beer scene, Napar has 14 beers on tap, six of which are brewed on-site, including IPA, pale ale and stout. There’s also an accomplished list of bottled beers. It’s a stunning space, with a gleaming steampunk aesthetic and a great rock and indie soundtrack. Creative food changes seasonally.
GARAGE BEER COCRAFT BEER
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 528 59 89; www.garagebeer.co; Carrer del Consell de Cent 261; h5pm-midnight Mon-Thu, 5pm-2.30am Fri, noon-3am Sat, 2pm-midnight Sun; mUniversitat)
One of the first of the slew of craft-beer bars to pop up in Barcelona, Garage brews its own in a space at the bar, and offers around 10 different styles at a time. The eponymous Garage (a delicate session IPA) and Slinger (a more robust IPA) are always present on the board.
Other favourites include Imperial Chocolate (stout) and Culture Trip (raspberry Berliner Weisse).
BIERCABCRAFT BEER
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %644 689045; www.biercab.com; Carrer de Muntaner 55; hbar noon-midnight Mon-Thu, noon-2am Fri & Sat, 5pm-midnight Sun, shop 3.30pm-10pm Mon-Sat; W; mUniversitat)
Beneath an artistic ceiling installation resembling a forest of giant matchsticks, this brilliant craft-beer bar has 30 brews from around the world rotating on its taps. Burgers to accompany them are made from Wagyu beef and named for Barcelona neighbourhoods. Pop into its adjacent shop for another 500 bottled varieties kept cold in fridges.
MONKEY FACTORYCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 681 78 93; Carrer de Còrsega 234; h6.30pm-2am Tue & Wed, to 3am Thu-Sat; dFGC Provença)
DJs spin on weekends at this high-spirited venue but it’s positively hopping from early on most nights. ‘Funky monkey’ (triple sec, gin, lime and egg white), ‘chimpa sour’ (cardamom-infused pisco sour) and ‘chita’ (passionfruit purée, vodka, cinnamon syrup and ginger) are among the inventive cocktails mixed up behind the neon-green-lit bar.
ANTILLA BCNCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 451 45 64; www.antillasalsa.com; Carrer d’Aragó 141; cover Fri & Sat €10; h10pm-4am Wed, 11pm-4am Thu, 11pm-6am Fri & Sat, 7pm-2am Sun; mUrgell)
The salsateca in town, this is the place to come for Cuban son, merengue, salsa and a whole lot more.
CITY HALLCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 238 07 22; www.cityhallbarcelona.com; Rambla de Catalunya 2-4; cover from €10; h10pm-6am Mon, 12.30am-6am Tue-Sun; mCatalunya)
A long corridor leads to the dance floor of this venerable and popular club, located in a former theatre. Music styles, from house and other electric sounds to funk, change nightly; check the agenda online. The cover charge includes a drink.
It’s also a live music venue.
ÁTAMEGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 421 41 33; Carrer del Consell de Cent 257; h7.30pm-2.30am Tue, 8.30pm-2.30am Wed, Thu & Sun, 8.30pm-3am Fri & Sat; mUniversitat)
Cool for a coffee earlier on, Átame (Tie Me Up) heats up later in the night when the gay crowd comes out to play. There is usually a raunchy show on Friday nights.
AIRELESBIAN
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Sala Diana; %93 487 83 42; www.grupoarena.com; Carrer de la Diputació 233; cover Fri/Sat €5/6; h11pm-2.30am Thu-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
At this popular lesbian hang-out, the dance floor is spacious and there’s usually a DJ in command of the tunes, which veer from hits of the ’80s and ’90s to Latin and techno. As a rule, only male friends of the girls are allowed entry, although in practice the crowd tends to be fairly mixed.
PLATA BARGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 452 46 36; www.platabar.com; Carrer del Consell de Cent 233; h8pm-1.30am Wed & Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mUniversitat)
Summer seats on the corner terrace of this wide-open bar attract a lot of lads hopping between the area’s gay bars. Inside, metallic horse-saddle stools are lined up at the bar and high tables, the music is a mix of dance and trance, and bartenders whip up eye-popping cocktails.
COSMOCAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 105 79 92; www.galeriacosmo.com; Carrer d’Enric Granados 3; h10am-10pm; mUniversitat)
Set on a pedestrian strip just behind the university, this groovy cafe-gallery has a bicycle hanging from the high, white walls, bright splashy murals and gaily painted ventilation pipes, and even makes a feature of its fire hose. Along with fresh juices, hot chocolate, teas, pastries and snacks, it serves beer and wine.
QUILOMBOBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %606 144272; Carrer d’Aribau 149; h9pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, 8.30pm-3am Fri & Sat; dFGC Provença)
Some formulas just work, and this place has been working since the 1970s. Set up some guitars in the table-packed back room, add some cheapish pre-prepared mojitos and plastic tubs of nuts, and let the punters do the rest. They pour in, creating plenty of quilombo (fuss). Live music plays most nights from 11pm and impromptu parties are common.
LA FIRABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %682 323714; Carrer de Provença 171; cover €14; h11pm-5am Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat; dFGC Provença)
Wander in past crazy mirrors, penny slot machines and other ancient fairground attractions from Germany as well as futuristic furniture like glowing cuboid stools. The music swings wildly from house through ’90s hits to Spanish pop classics. Admission includes two drinks. With 150 spirits on hand, it claims to have 500 varieties of shots.
PUNTO BCNGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 451 91 52; www.grupoarena.com; Carrer de Muntaner 65; h6pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mUniversitat)
It’s an oldie but a goody. A big bar over two levels with a slightly older crowd, this place fills to bursting on Friday and Saturday nights with its blend of Spanish pop and dance. It’s a friendly early stop on a gay night out, and you can shoot a round of pool here.
LA CHAPELLEGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 453 30 76; Carrer de Muntaner 67; h4pm-2am Sun-Thu, to 2.30am Fri & Sat; mUniversitat)
A typical long, narrow Eixample bar with white-tiled walls, La Chapelle houses a plethora of crucifixes and niches that far outdo what you’d find in any other ‘chapel’. No need for six-pack abs here: this is a relaxed gay meeting place that welcomes all types.
BACON BEARGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 431 00 00; Carrer de Casanova 64; h6pm-2.30am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, to 2.30am Sun; mUrgell)
Every bear needs a cave to go to, and this is a rather friendly one. It’s really just a big bar for burly gay folk. The music cranks up on weekends.
ARENA MADREGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 487 83 42; www.grupoarena.com; Carrer de Balmes 32; cover Sun-Fri €6, Sat €12; h12.30-5.45am Sun-Thu, to 6.45am Fri & Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Popular with a hot young crowd, Arena Madre is one of the top clubs in town for boys seeking boys. Mainly electronic and house, with a striptease show on Monday, techno on Thursday, and live shows throughout the week. Heteros are welcome but a minority.
ARENA CLASSICGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 487 83 42; www.grupoarena.com; Carrer de la Diputació 233; cover Fri/Sat €6/12; h2.30am-6am Fri & Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Spinning mostly techno, Arena Classic attracts an upbeat, energetic gay crowd. Entry includes a drink.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
THE GAIXAMPLE

The area just above Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes and to the left of Rambla de Catalunya is popularly known as the ‘Gaixample’, for its proliferation of gay bars and restaurants. Some of the best include Átame, Arena Classic and Aire (this last one’s for the ladies), but note that some old favourites are also to be found in adjoining neighbourhoods, such as Metro in Sant Antoni.
6 La Dreta de L’Eixample
oLES GENS QUE J’AIMEBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 68 79; www.lesgensquejaime.com; Carrer de València 286; h6pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, 7pm-3am Fri & Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Atmospheric and intimate, this basement relic of the 1960s follows a deceptively simple formula: chilled jazz music in the background, minimal lighting from an assortment of flea-market lamps and a cosy, cramped scattering of red-velvet-backed lounges around tiny dark tables.
EL VITIBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 633 83 36; www.elviti.com; Passeig de Sant Joan 62; hnoon-midnight Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; W; mTetuan)
Along the hip Passeig de Sant Joan, El Viti checks all the boxes – high ceilings, brick walls both bare and glazed, black-clad staff and a barrel of artisanal vermouth on the bar. It also serves a good line in tapas.
CAFÈ DEL CENTRECAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 488 11 01; Carrer de Girona 69; h9am-11pm Mon-Fri, 11am-11pm Sat; W; mGirona)
Step back into the 19th century in this cafe that’s been in business since 1873. The mahogany bar extends down the right side as you enter, fronted by marble-topped tables and wooden chairs. It exudes an almost melancholy air by day but gets busy at night, when live jazz piano plays. It stocks 50 beers and 15 loose-leaf teas.
MICHAEL COLLINS PUBIRISH PUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 459 19 64; www.michaelcollinspubs.com; Plaça de la Sagrada Família 4; h1pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; W; mSagrada Família)
To be sure of a little Catalan-Irish craic, this barn-sized, storming pub beloved by locals and expats is just the ticket. Traditional Irish music sessions strike up on Mondays; live music also plays most weekends.
It’s ideal for football fans wanting big-screen action over their pints, too.
NEW CHAPSGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 53 65; www.newchaps.com; Avinguda Diagonal 365; h9pm-3am Sun-Thu, to 3.30am Fri & Sat; mDiagonal)
Leather lovers get in some close-quarters inspection on the dance floor and especially in the dark room, downstairs past the fairly dark loos in the vaulted cellars. It’s a classic handlebar-moustache gay porn kinda place that attracts an older crowd.
3ENTERTAINMENT

CITY HALLLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 238 07 22; www.cityhallbarcelona.com; Rambla de Catalunya 2-4; mCatalunya)
Also home to a nightclub, this former theatre is also the perfect size and shape for live music, holding a crowd of around 500. The acoustics are great and the layout means everyone gets a good view of the stage.
MEDITERRÁNEOLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.elmedi.net; Carrer de Balmes 129; h10.30pm-3am; dFGC Provença)
Free live music plays nightly at this student favourite. Order a beer and enjoy the free nuts at one of the tiny tables while waiting for the next act to tune up at the back. Often the young performers are surprisingly good.
MÉLIÈS CINEMESCINEMA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 451 00 51; www.meliescinemes.com; Carrer de Villarroel 102; tickets €4-7; mUrgell)
A cosy cinema with two screens, the Méliès specialises in the best of recent releases from Hollywood and Europe.
TEATRE TÍVOLITHEATRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 412 20 63; www.grupbalana.com; Carrer de Casp 8; ticket prices vary; hbox office 5-8pm & 90min before shows; mCatalunya)
Dating from 1919, this grand theatre has three storeys of boxes and a generous stage. There’s a fairly rapid turnover of drama and musicals, with pieces often not staying on for more than a couple of weeks. Concerts (such as Bruce Springsteen, Elvis Costello and Radiohead) also take place here.
7 SHOPPING

oJOAN MÚRRIAFOOD & DRINKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 57 89; www.murria.cat; Carrer de Roger de Llúria 85; h10am-8.30pm Tue-Fri, 10am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Sat; mGirona)
Ramon Casas designed the 1898 Modernista shopfront advertisements featured at this culinary temple of speciality food goods from around Catalonia and beyond. Artisan cheeses, Iberian hams, caviar, canned delicacies, smoked fish, cavas and wines, coffee and loose-leaf teas are among the treats in store.
oFLORES NAVARROFLOWERS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 457 40 99; www.floristeriasnavarro.com; Carrer de València 320; h24hr; mGirona)
You never know when you might need flowers, and this florist never closes. Established in 1960, it’s a vast space (or couple of spaces, in fact), and worth a visit just for the bank of colour and wonderful fragrance.
CACAO SAMPAKAFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 272 08 33; www.cacaosampaka.com; Carrer del Consell de Cent 292; h9am-9pm Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Chocoholics will be convinced they have died and passed on to a better place. Load up in the shop or head for the bar out the back where you can have a classic xocolata (hot chocolate) and munch on exquisite chocolate cakes, tarts, ice cream, sweets and sandwiches. The bonbons make particularly good presents.
ALTAÏRBOOKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 342 71 71; www.altair.es; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 616; h10am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; W; mCatalunya)
Enter a wonderland of travel in this extensive bookshop, which has enough guidebooks, maps, travel literature and other books to induce a severe case of itchy feet. It has a travellers noticeboard and, downstairs, a cafe.
DR BLOOMFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 292 23 27; www.drbloom.es; Rambla de Catalunya 30; h10am-9pm Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
A new collection comes out every month at Dr Bloom, so the stock is constantly rotating. Designed and made in Barcelona, the label’s dresses, tops, shawls and more have an emphasis on bright colours and bold prints no matter the season.
SERGIO ARANDAJEWELLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %648 796029; www.sergioaranda.shop; Carrer Roger de Llūria 93; h10am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri, noon-2.30pm Sat; mPasseig de Grácia)
Swiss-born jeweller Sergio Aranda has worked throughout Europe for some of the world’s most prestigious names, and now creates unique pieces incorporating materials such as coins and cultured pearls. Exquisite items in his collections span all budgets.
LURDES BERGADAFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 48 51; www.lurdesbergada.es; Rambla de Catalunya 112; h10.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mDiagonal)
Mother-and-son design team Lurdes Bergada and Syngman Cucala’s classy men’s and women’s fashions are made from natural fibres and have attracted a cult following.
REGIACOSMETICS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 216 01 21; www.regia.es; Passeig de Gràcia 39; h9.30am-8.30pm Mon-Fri, 10.30am-8.30pm Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
In business since 1928, Regia stocks all the name brands and also has a private perfume museum out the back. Fragrances aside, it carries a range of cosmetics and has its own line of bath products.
MERCAT DEL NINOTMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 323 49 09; www.mercatdelninot.com; Carrer de Mallorca 133; h9am-8pm Mon-Fri, to 2pm Sat; W; mHospital Clínic)
A gleaming, modern neighbourhood food market, selling mostly meat and fish, Mercat del Ninot also has a couple of stalls where you can grab a bite to eat.
MERCAT DE LA CONCEPCIÓMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %675 693616; www.laconcepcio.cat; Carrer d’Aragó 313-317; h8am-8pm Tue-Fri, to 3pm Mon & Sat; mGirona)
Mercat de la Concepció has 54 stalls selling food, flowers, wine and more, including several on-site bars.
ADOLFO DOMÍNGUEZFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 487 41 70; www.adolfodominguez.com; Passeig de Gràcia 32; h10am-9pm Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
One of the stars of Spanish prêt-à-porter, this label produces classic men’s and women’s garments from quality materials. Encompassing anything from regal party gowns to kids’ outfits (that might have you thinking of British aristocracy), the broad range generally has a conservative air, with elegant cuts that make no concessions to rebellious urban ideals.
LOEWEFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 216 04 00; www.loewe.com; Passeig de Gràcia 35; h10am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Loewe is one of Spain’s leading and oldest fashion stores, founded in 1846. It specialises in luxury leather (shoes, accessories and travel bags), and also has lines in perfume, sunglasses, cuff links, silk scarves and jewellery. This branch opened in 1943 in the Modernista Casa Lleó Morera.
NORMA COMICSBOOKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 244 84 23; www.normacomics.com; Passeig de Sant Joan 7-9; h10.30am-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mArc de Triomf)
Norma stocks a huge range of comics, both Spanish and international – everything from Tintin to out-there sci-fi comics can be found here, along with figurines, clothing, mugs and other merchandise.
BULEVARD ROSASHOPPING CENTRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 83 31; www.bulevardrosa.com; Passeig de Gràcia 55-57; h10.30am-9pm Mon-Sat; mPasseig de Gràcia)
Bulevard Rosa is a small shopping arcade with a clutch of upmarket boutiques selling handbags, shoes, fashion and the like.
FNACELECTRONICS, BOOKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %902 100632; www.fnac.es; El Triangle, Plaça de Catalunya 4; h9.30am-9pm Mon-Sat; mCatalunya)
FNAC, the French electronics, book and music emporium, has a couple of branches around town, but this is the biggest.
ANTINOUSBOOKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 301 90 70; www.antinouslibros.com; Carrer de Casanova 72; h11am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Sat; mUniversitat)
LGBT travellers may want to browse in this spacious and relaxed gay bookshop in the Gaixample.
2Local Life
Shopping in the Quadrat d’Or

1 The New Wave

You could spend an entire day just along Passeig de Gràcia but detour for a moment to Lurdes Bergada, a boutique run by mother-and-son designer team Lurdes Bergada and Syngman Cucala. Their classy men’s and women’s fashions using natural fibres have attracted a cult following.
2 A Pastry Stop

Time for a refuelling stop. Few pastry shops have such a long-established pedigree as Mauri. The plush interior is capped by an ornate fresco dating back to Mauri’s first days in 1929. Its croissants and feather-light ensaïmadas (sweet buns) are near perfect.

4 Luxury Luggage

While bags and suitcases in every conceivable colour of butter-soft leather are the mainstay at 1846-founded Loewe, there is also a range of clothing for men and women, along with some stunning – and stunningly priced – accessories. The luxurious shop is fittingly housed in the Casa Lleó Morera, with some interior details by Domènech i Montaner.
5 Say It with Chocolate

A sleek and modern temple to chocolate, Cacao Sampaka is both a cafe and shop, and is the perfect place to stock up with gifts to take back home. Select from every conceivable flavour (rosemary, perhaps, or curry?), either in bar form or as individual choccies to fill your own elegant little gift box.
6 Fine Wines

For superior souvenirs in liquid form, head to the state-of-the-art Monvínic, a veritable temple of wine with more than 3000 wines in its cellar, including some extremely rare finds. Try before you buy in the wine bar (or over a meal at its restaurant).
7 Chill Down

Cosmo is a bright, white cavernous space, dotted with colour from the exhibitions that adorn its high walls. It has a nice selection of teas, cakes and snacks. Set on a pedestrian strip, it’s perfect for an evening tipple inside the groovy interior or out on the terrace.
2SPORTS & ACTIVITIES

CATALUNYA BUS TURÍSTICBUS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %932 85 38 32; www.catalunyabusturistic.cat; Plaça de Catalunya; adult/child 1-day ticket €29/16, 2-day ticket €39/20; h9am-8pm Jun-Sep, to 7pm Oct-May; mCatalunya)
Open-topped buses run three different hop-on, hop-off circuits around Barcelona’s main sights. One- and two-day passes are valid on all three routes. There are up to two services per hour. Tickets are cheaper online.
ESPAI BOISÀCOOKING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 192 60 21; www.espaiboisa.com; Passatge Lluís Pellicer 8; 2½-hour course from €45; mHospital Clínic) S
Run by a young, multilingual Venezuelan-Catalan couple, this first-rate outfit offers various themed cooking courses. They emphasise organic, seasonal ingredients from local producers outside of Barcelona – put to good use in dishes including paella, a range of tapas dishes and crema catalana (a Catalan version of crème brûlée).
The best part is feasting on your creations, accompanied by generous glasses of organic Catalan wine or sangria.
WORTH A DETOUR
AN OUTLET OUTING

For the ultimate discount-fashion overdose, head out of town for some outlet shopping at La Roca Village (%93 842 39 39; www.larocavillage.com; Santa Agnès de Malayanes; h10am-9pm Mon-Fri, to 10pm Sat & Sun). Here, a village has been given over to consumer madness. At a long line of Spanish and international fashion boutiques you’ll find clothes, shoes, accessories and designer homewares at (they claim) up to 60% off normal retail prices.
To get here, follow the AP-7 tollway north from Barcelona, take exit 12 (marked Cardedeu) and follow the signs for ‘Centre Comercial’. The Sagalés Bus Company organises the Shopping Express from Passeig de Gràcia and the World Trade Center – see www.sagales.com for details. Alternatively, take a slower bus from the same company from Fabra i Puig metro station (four departures Monday to Friday, three in August) or a rodalies train to Granollers and pick up the shuttle (Monday to Friday only) or a taxi there.



Gràcia & Park Güell

Neighbourhood Top Five

1 Park Güell Meandering along the winding paths amid the wild sculptures, mosaics and columns of Gaudí’s open-air wonderland high above the city.
2 Casa Vicens Admiring the strange interplay of brick, chequerboard patterns and Moorish elements on this Unesco-listed castle mansion, Gaudí’s first commission.
3 Mercat de la Llibertat Shopping for delectable local specialities (and sampling them too) at the neighbourhood’s emblematic market, dating from the 19th century.
4 Soda Acústic Hearing Balkan beats, experimental jazz and other eclectic sounds in one of Gràcia’s most innovative performance spaces.
5 Verdi Watching an indie film at this neighbourhood icon, followed by tapas on the restaurant-lined lane out the front.
Explore Gràcia & Park Güell
Once a separate village north of L’Eixample, and an industrial district famous for its republican and liberal ideas, Gràcia was incorporated into the city of Barcelona in 1897, despite staunch opposition from locals. The neighbourhood retains its distinct character today, with a boho feel – it’s home to artists, hip local luminaries and young families.
Start the day in Gràcia by exploring Park Güell and move down to the centre of the neighbourhood. If you walk from the park, cut across the traffic-choked Travessera de Dalt and go down Carrer de Verdi, into the heart of Gràcia – it’s around 1km in total.
Plunge into the atmosphere of its narrow streets and small plazas, and the bars and restaurants on and around them. The liveliest are Carrer de Verdi, where you will find wonderful cafes, bars and shops; Plaça del Sol, a raucous square populated by cool bars; Plaça de la Vila de Gràcia, dotted with cafes and restaurants; family-friendly Plaça de la Revolució de Setembre de 1868; and the tree-lined Plaça de la Virreina, a particularly lovely square with cafes, shops and a chilled-out feel. Gràcia is great during the day or at night – the squares are sunny and relaxed for breakfast or lunch, and lively at night with scenesters enjoying a drink alfresco.
Local Life
AIndependent shops Wander up Carrer de Verdi and along Travessera de Gràcia for an insight into what Gràcia does best. One-off boutiques and food shops abound on these people-filled streets.
AMarkets The Mercat de la Llibertat is a neighbourhood jewel but it’s not the only historic market here. The Mercat de l’Abaceria Central dates from the late 19th century and has stalls filled with delicious products as well as ready-to-eat dishes.
AOld-time bars Gràcia still has plenty of tapas bars that have been around forever – Bar Bodega Quimet is a classic example.
Getting There & Away
AFoot Strolling along Passeig de Gràcia from Plaça de Catalunya is a wonderful way to reach the neighbourhood. The 1.5km walk takes around 25 minutes.
AMetro Línia 3 (Fontana stop) leaves you halfway up Carrer Gran de Gràcia and close to a network of busy squares. To enter Gràcia from the northern side, take Línia 4 to Joanic.
Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
A wonderful way to take in Gràcia’s atmosphere is from a cafe or restaurant on one of its many squares. Arrive after dusk and watch as the place comes to life in the post-work hours.
5 Best Places to Eat
AChivuo’s
ACon Gracia
ALa Panxa del Bisbe 
ABar Bodega Quimet 
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
ABobby Gin
ARabipelao
AElephanta
AViblioteca
For reviews, see here.
7 Best Places to Shop
AColmillo de Morsa 
AFamily Beer
ACan Luc
AAmalia Vermell
For reviews, see here.

TOP SIGHT
PARK GÜELL
Park Güell – north of Gràcia and about 4km from Plaça de Catalunya – is where Gaudí turned his hand to landscape gardening. It’s a surreal, enchanting place where the iconic Modernista’s passion for natural forms really took flight, to the point where the artificial almost seems more natural than the natural.


ELI_ASENOVA/GETTY IMAGES ©
DON’T MISS

ALearning about Gaudí’s building methods at the Centre d’Interpretació
AThe Sala Hipóstila’s stone forest
AThe life of the artist at Casa-Museu Gaudí
AThe undulating tiled bench with views across the city
PRACTICALITIES

A%93 409 18 31
Awww.parkguell.cat
ACarrer d’Olot 7
Aadult/child €8/5.60
Ah8am-9.30pm May-Aug, to 8.30pm Apr, Sep & Oct, to 6.30pm Nov-Mar
Ag24, 92, mLesseps, Vallcarca
A City Park
Park Güell originated in 1900, when Count Eusebi Güell bought the tree-covered hillside of El Carmel (then outside Barcelona) and hired Gaudí to create a miniature city of houses for the wealthy, surrounded by landscaped grounds. The project was a commercial flop and was abandoned in 1914 – but not before Gaudí had created, in his inimitable manner, steps, a plaza, two gatehouses and 3km of roads and walks. In 1922 the city bought the estate for use as a public park. The park became a Unesco World Heritage site in 2004. The idea was based on the English ‘garden cities’, much admired by Güell, hence the spelling of ‘Park’.
Just inside the main entrance on Carrer d’Olot, immediately recognisable by the two Hansel-and-Gretel gatehouses, is the park’s Centre d’Interpretació, in the Pavelló de Consergeria, which is a typically curvaceous former porter’s home that hosts a display on Gaudí’s building methods and the history of the park. There are superb views from the top floor.
Much of the park is still wooded, but it’s laced with pathways. The best views are from the cross-topped Turó del Calvari in the southwest corner.
Sala Hipóstila (The Doric Temple)
The steps up from the entrance, guarded by a mosaic dragon/lizard (a copy of which you can buy in many central souvenir shops), lead to the Sala Hipóstila (aka the Doric Temple). This forest of 86 stone columns – some leaning like mighty trees bent by the weight of time – was originally intended as a market. To the left curves a gallery whose twisted stonework columns and roof give the effect of a cloister beneath tree roots – a motif repeated in several places in the park. On top of the Sala Hipóstila is a broad open space. Its centrepiece is the Banc de Trencadís, a tiled bench curving sinuously around its perimeter, which was designed by one of Gaudí’s closest colleagues, architect Josep Maria Jujol (1879–1949). With Gaudí, however, there is always more than meets the eye. This giant platform was designed as a kind of catchment area for rainwater washing down the hillside. The water is filtered through a layer of stone and sand, and it drains down through the columns to an underground cistern.
Casa-Museu Gaudí
Above and to the right of the entrance, the spired house you see is the Casa-Museu Gaudí (%93 219 38 11; www.casamuseugaudi.org; Carretera del Carmel 23a; adult/child €5.50/free; h9am-8pm Apr-Sep, 10am-6pm Oct-Mar; g24, 92, 116, mLesseps), where Gaudí lived for almost the last 20 years of his life (1906–26). Furniture he designed (including items that once lived in La Pedrera, Casa Batlló and Casa Calvet) is displayed along with other memorabilia. The house was built in 1904 by Francesc Berenguer i Mestres as a prototype for the 60 or so houses that were originally planned here.
ADMISSION

With an estimated four million visitors a year, the park is extremely popular and an entrance fee is imposed on the central area containing most of its attractions. Access is limited to a certain number of people every half-hour, and it’s wise to book ahead online (which also saves you a euro).
One-hour guided tours in multiple languages including English take place year-round and cost €7 (plus park admission); prebook online.
TAKE A BREAK

Before or after making the trip up to the park, stop off at La Panxa del Bisbe for deliciously creative tapas and good wines.
The park makes a spectacular setting for a picnic; bring supplies with you as there’s nowhere to stock up nearby.
1SIGHTS

PARK GÜELLPARK
See here.
CASA VICENSMUSEUM
(%93 348 42 58; www.casavicens.org; Carrer de les Carolines 18-24; adult/child €16/14, guided tour per person additional €3; h10am-8pm, last tour 7.30pm; mFontana)
A Unesco-listed masterpiece, Casa Vicens was first opened regularly to the public in 2017. The angular, turreted 1885-completed private house created for stock and currency broker Manuel Vicens i Montaner was Gaudí’s inaugural commission, when the architect was aged just 30. Tucked away west of Gràcia’s main drag, the richly detailed facade is awash with ceramic colour and shape. You’re free to wander through at your own pace but 30-minute guided tours (available in English) bring the building to life.
As was frequently the case, Gaudí sought inspiration from the past, in this case the rich heritage of building in the Mudéjar-style brick, typical in those parts of Spain reconquered from the Moors. Mudéjar architecture was created by those Arabs and Berbers allowed to remain in Spain after the Christian reconquests.
The renovated building is accessible for visitors with limited mobility (including wheelchairs). Temporary exhibitions are mounted alongside permanent displays covering the building’s history. Allow time for a drink at the cafe in the garden.
GAUDÍ EXPERIENCEMUSEUM
(%93 285 44 40; www.gaudiexperiencia.com; Carrer de Larrard 41; adult/child €9/7.50; h10.30am-7pm Apr-Sep, to 5pm Oct-Mar; mLesseps)
The Gaudí Experience is a fun-filled Disney-style look at the life and work of Barcelona’s favourite son, just a stone’s throw from Park Güell. There are models of his buildings and whizz-bang interactive exhibits and touchscreens, but the highlight is the stomach-churning 4D presentation in its tiny screening room. Not recommended for the frail or children aged under six years.
ESGLÉSIA DE SANT JOANCHURCH
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 237 73 58; www.conferenciaepiscopal.es; Carrer de la Santa Creu 2; h8am-12.45pm & 4-8pm, hours can vary; mFontana, Joanic)
Construction on this striking church began in 1878 and was completed in 1884. Designed by Francesc Berenguer i Mestres, Gaudí’s protégé, it’s believed that the interior chapel is the work of Gaudí himself, though the jury is still out. What is certain is that Gaudí regularly worshipped here. Much of the church was destroyed by Leftists in 1909 and again in 1938, though the chapel survived unscathed. Rebuilding wrapped up in 1951. Enter via Plaça de la Virriena.
MERCAT DE LA LLIBERTATMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 09 95; www.mercatsbcn.com; Plaça de la Llibertat 27; h8am-8pm Mon-Fri, to 3pm Sat; dFGC Gràcia)
Opened in 1888, the ‘Market of Liberty’ was covered over in 1893 by Francesc Berenguer i Mestres (1866–1914), Gaudí’s long-time assistant, in typically fizzy Modernista style, employing generous whirls of wrought iron. It received a considerable facelift in 2009 but remains emblematic of the Gràcia district: full of life and fabulous fresh produce.
5EATING

LA PUBILLACATALAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 29 94; Plaça de la Llibertat 23; mains €8-13.50; h8.30am-5pm Mon, to midnight Tue-Sat; mFontana)
Hidden away by the Mercat de la Llibertat, La Pubilla specialises in hearty ‘esmorzars de forquilla’ (‘fork breakfasts’) beloved by market workers and nearby residents. There’s also a daily three-course menú del día for €16, which includes Catalan dishes such as baked cod, or roast pork cheek with chickpeas. Arrive early for a chance of a table.
CHIVUO’SBURGERS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 51 34; www.chivuos.com; Carrer del Torrent de l’Olla 175; burgers €7-9; h1-5pm & 7pm-midnight Mon-Sat; mFontana)
Burgers and craft beers make a fine pair at this buzzing den. A mostly local crowd comes for huge burgers (served rare unless you specify otherwise) with house-made sauces – best ordered with fluffy, golden-fried fritas (chips). Mostly Catalan and Spanish brews, including excellent offerings from Barcelona-based Edge Brewing, Catalan Brewery, Napar and Garage Beer, rotate on the eight taps.
Sandwiches such as pulled pork or tuna melts are also available.
BAR BODEGA QUIMETTAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 41 89; Carrer de Vic 23; tapas €3-11.50; h10am-11.30pm Mon-Fri, noon-11.30pm Sat & Sun; mFontana)
A remnant from a bygone age, Bar Bodega Quimet is a delightfully atmospheric bar, with old bottles lining the walls, marble tables and a burnished wooden bar. The list of tapas and seafood is almost exhaustive, while another house speciality is torrades – huge slabs of toasted white bread topped with cured meats, fresh anchovies and sardines.
In summer you’ll be served a refreshing glass of chilled gazpacho.
LA NENACAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 285 14 76; www.facebook.com/chocolaterialanena; Carrer de Ramon i Cajal 36; dishes €2-4.50; h8.30am-10.30pm Mon-Fri, 9am-10.30pm Sat & Sun; c; mFontana)
At this delightfully chaotic space, indulge in cups of suïssos (rich hot chocolate) served with a plate of heavy homemade whipped cream and melindros (spongy sweet biscuits), desserts and a few savoury dishes (including crêpes). The place is strewn with books, and you can play with the board games on the shelves.
The area out the back is designed to keep kids busy, with toys, books and a blackboard with chalk, making it an ideal family rest stop.
LA EMPANADERIA DE GRÀCIAEMPANADAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer de Francisco Giner 60; empanadas €1.95; hnoon-4pm & 5.30-10pm; dFGC Gràcia)
For a cheap, filling snack, this corner empanaderia is a brilliant bet, serving scrumptious stuffed pastries. Each day, 20 different varieties are available: savoury flavours might include pumpkin and mozzarella, pear and goat cheese, hummus, celery and Roquefort or spicy beef and olive, while sweet styles span banana and honey to apple and cinnamon.
.ITITALIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 461 92 71; Carrer del Topazi 26; mains €6.50-12; h9.30am-midnight Mon-Fri, noon-4pm & 7pm-midnight Sat, closed Aug; Wv; mFontana)
Pizza bases at. IT (‘Italian Tradition’) are made from Caputo flour and fermented for 48 hours before being baked in a 400°C wood-fired oven. Just some of the classic topping combinations include Veneto (gorgonzola, mozzarella, radicchio and walnuts) and Abbruzzo (fresh tomato, scamorza cheese, pistachio mortadella and basil). Huge, fresh salads are a meal in themselves; pastas change daily.
There’s a creative range of ‘Italian tapas’ (fried courgette flowers, meat-stuffed olives and aubergine ‘meatballs’ with Parmesan) and lush desserts like olive-oil chocolate cake and Limoncello tiramisu.
CASA PORTUGUESABAKERY€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 021 88 03; www.acasaportuguesa.com; Carrer de l’Or 8; dishes €2-8; h10.30am-9pm; mFontana)
Overlooking Plaça del Diamant, Casa Portuguesa is a delightful bakery and purveyor of delicacies. The pasteis de belém (Portuguese-style custard tarts) are magnificent, and you’ll also find fruit tarts, daily changing organic salads, good coffee and Portuguese wines. For a kick, have a shot of ginjinha (cherry brandy).
CAFÈ CAMÈLIAVEGETARIAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 415 36 86; Carrer de Verdi 79; mains €7.50-11.50; h10am-midnight Mon-Sat, to 9pm Sun; Wv; mFontana)
A peaceful spot for coffee, set lunches and desserts, this pretty little vegetarian cafe has a small menu of well-executed dishes – hummus, vegetable curry, open-faced sandwiches, quinoa burgers with roasted vegetables and a risotto of the day.
HIMALINEPALI€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 285 15 68; www.restaurantehimalibcn.com; Carrer de Milà i Fontanals 60; mains €7.50-13; hnoon-11.30pm; mJoanic)
Strung with Nepalese prayer flags, this simple spot serves dishes such as lamb curry, mixed grills with rice and naan, and lamb and vegetable momo (dumplings).
TIMELINESANDWICHES€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 79 38; Carrer de la Providència 3; sandwiches €6.50-9; h7pm-2am Mon-Thu, 7pm-3am Fri, noon-3am Sat, noon-2am Sun; v; mLesseps, Fontana)
Like stepping into an enchanted cuckoo clock, cosy TimeLine is decked with black-and-white tiled floors, curious artwork (roller skates, twisted light sculptures), and a chessboard. A fun, multilingual crowd comes for cocktails, sandwiches (curry chicken, meatballs, veggie barbecue), hummus platters and goat-cheese-drizzled salads. Weekend brunch buffets (€18) include bottomless mimosas (made with champagne and orange juice).
LA PANXA DEL BISBETAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 213 70 49; Carrer del Torrent de les Flors 158; tapas €8.50-15, tasting menus €28-36; h1.30-3.30pm & 8.30pm-midnight Tue-Sat; mJoanic)
With low lighting and an artfully minimalist interior, the ‘Bishop’s Belly’ serves creative tapas that earn high praise from the mostly local crowd. Feast on prawn-stuffed courgette flowers, grilled octopus with green chilli and watermelon, and slow-roasted lamb with mint couscous. Top off the meal with a bottle of wine such as an Albariño white from Galicia (by-the-glass options are more limited).
PEPA TOMATETAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 210 46 98; www.pepatomategrup.com; Plaça de la Revolució de Setembre de 1868 17; sharing plates €7-17; h8pm-midnight Mon, from 9am Tue-Fri, from 10am Sat, from 11am Sun; c; mFontana)
This casual tapas spot on Plaça de la Revolució de Setembre de 1868 is popular at all hours of the day. Fresh produce takes front and centre on the wide-ranging menu in dishes like fried green tomatoes, Andalucian baby squid, tandoori lamb tacos, Iberian pork or mushroom, croquettes, and carrot gazpacho in summer.
It’s popular with families (crayons are available, and there’s a mini playground at the front). Weekday multicourse lunch specials cost €12.50.
CAFÉ GODOTINTERNATIONAL€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 368 20 36; www.cafegodot.com; Carrer de Sant Domènec 19; mains €10-18.50; h10am-1am Mon-Fri, 11am-2am Sat & Sun; mFontana)
A stylish space of exposed brick, timber and tiles, opening to a garden out back, Godot is a relaxing place with an extensive menu, ranging from white-wine-steamed mussels and scallops with Thai-style green curry to duck confit with lentils and spinach. Brunch is an American-style affair with eggs, crispy bacon and fluffy pancakes.
CANTINA MACHITOMEXICAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 34 14; Carrer de Torrijos 47; mains €9.50-16.50; h1-4pm & 7pm-1am; mFontana, Joanic)
On a leafy street, colourful Machito – adorned with Frida Kahlo images – gets busy with locals, and the outside tables are a great place to eat and drink until late. Start with a michelada (spicy beer cocktail) before dining on Mexican delights like quesadillas, tacos and enchiladas. Refreshing iced waters are flavoured with honey and lime or mint and fruit.
CAL BOTERCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 458 84 62; www.restaurantcalboter.com; Carrer de Tordera 62; mains €8-15; h1-4pm & 9pm-midnight Tue-Sat, 1-4pm Sun & Mon; mJoanic)
Families and high-spirited groups of pals are drawn to this classic restaurant for cargols a la llauna (snails sautéed in a tin), filet de bou amb salsa de foie (a thick clump of tender beef drowned in an orange and foie gras sauce), and other Catalan specialities.
BILBAOSPANISH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 458 96 24; www.restaurantbilbao.com; Carrer del Perill 33; mains €16-30; h1-4pm & 9-11pm Mon-Fri, 2-4pm & 9-11pm Sat, closed Aug; mDiagonal)
Behind its unassuming exterior, Bilbao is a timeless classic, where reservations for dinner are imperative. The back dining room, with bottle-lined walls, stout timber tables and sepia lighting evocative of a country tavern, sets the stage for feasting on hearty dishes like oxtail in red wine sauce, grilled pork trotters and codfish with garlic mousse, accompanied by good Spanish wines.
BOTAFUMEIROSEAFOOD€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 42 30; www.botafumeiro.es; Carrer Gran de Gràcia 81; mains €22-59; hnoon-1am; mFontana)
This temple of Galician shellfish has long been a magnet for VIPs visiting Barcelona. You can bring the price down by sharing a few medias raciones (large tapas plates) to taste a range of marine offerings followed by mains like spider crab pie, squid ink paella or grilled spiny lobster.
ROIG ROBÍCATALAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 92 22; www.roigrobi.com; Carrer de Sèneca 20; mains €21-36; h1.30-4pm & 8.30-11.30pm Mon-Fri, 8.30-11.30pm Sat; p; mDiagonal)
At this altar to refined traditional cooking, the seasonally changing menu serves as a showcase for beautifully presented creations with local and organic ingredients. Start off with tomato crème with Gorgonzola ice cream, before moving on to outstanding seafood rice dishes, salt-baked market-fresh fish or slow-roasted Pyrenees lamb. Call ahead to reserve a table on the vine-draped back patio.
WORTH A DETOUR
BUNKERS DEL CARMEL

For a magnificent view over the city that’s well off the beaten path, head to the neighbourhood of El Carmel and make the ascent up the hill known as Turó de la Rovira (Bunkers del Carmel; %93 256 21 22; www.museuhistoria.bcn.cat; Carrer de Marià Labèrnia; hmuseum 10am-2pm Wed, 10am-3pm Sat & Sun; gV17, 119) to the Bunkers del Carmel viewpoint. Above the weeds and dusty hillside, you’ll find the old concrete platforms that were once part of anti-aircraft battery during the Spanish Civil War (in the postwar, it was a shanty town until the early 1990s, and has lain abandoned since then). There is a small information centre/museum.
Placards at the sight give an overview of what once stood here. These days, those old firing platforms are better used as seating for a mix of students and young travellers who come for the mesmerising 360-degree views over the city. It’s a great place to watch the sunset. Before or after visiting here, you can stop for a bite and a drink at the charming, family-run Las Delicias (%93 429 22 02; www.barrestaurantedelicias.com; Carrer de Mühlberg 1; tapas €4-13, mains €9-14; h10am-4pm Tue-Sun & 7-10.30pm Tue-Thu, 8-11pm Fri & Sat; mEl Carmel, then bus 86).
To get to the park, when you arrive at the neighbourhood of El Carmel, have the bus driver tell you when you’re near the bunkers. From the bus stop, it’s a further 10-minute walk to the viewpoint.
CON GRACIAFUSION€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 238 02 01; www.congracia.es; Carrer de Martínez de la Rosa 8; tasting menus €65, with wine €95; h7-11pm Tue-Sat; mDiagonal)
This teeny hideaway (seating about 20 in total) is a hive of originality, producing delicately balanced Mediterranean cuisine with Asian touches. On offer is a regularly changing surprise tasting menu or the set ‘traditional’ one (both six courses), with dishes such as squid stuffed with jamón ibérico and black truffle, and sake-marinated tuna with walnut pesto. Book ahead.
CAN TRAVI NOUCATALAN€€€
(%93 428 03 01; www.gruptravi.com; Carrer de Jorge Manrique 8; mains €15.50-30; h1-4pm & 8-11pm; mMontbau)
Dining areas stretch out across two floors of this expansive 18th-century mansion. The warm colours, grandfather clock and rustic air make for a magical setting for dining on Catalan specialities like slow-roasted pork and lamb, and seafood casseroles. Reserve ahead.
2Neighbourhood Walk
The Squares of Gràcia

START PLAÇA DE JOAN CARLES I
END PLAÇA DE LA VIRREINA
LENGTH 1.9KM; 50 MINUTES
The obelisk at 1Plaça de Joan Carles I honours Spain’s present king for stifling an attempted coup d’état in February 1981, six years after Franco’s death.
Where Carrer Gran de Gràcia leads you into Gràcia proper, a grand Modernista edifice now turned hotel, 2Casa Fuster, rises in all its glory.
3Plaça de Gal·la Placidia recalls the brief sojourn of the Roman empress-to-be Galla Placidia, captive and wife of the Visigothic chief Athaulf in the 5th century AD. She hastily returned to her native Italy upon her captor-husband’s death.
4Plaça de la Llibertat (Liberty Sq) is home to the eponymous Modernista produce market. It was designed by one of Gaudí’s colleagues, Francesc Berenguer, who was busy in this part of town despite never having been awarded a diploma as an architect.
Popular 5Plaça de la Vila de Gràcia was, until a few years ago, named after the mayor under whom Gràcia was absorbed by Barcelona, Francesc Rius i Taulet. It is fronted by the local town hall (designed by Berenguer). At its heart stands the Torre del Rellotge (Clock Tower), long a symbol of Republican agitation.
Possibly the rowdiest of Gràcia’s squares, 6Plaça del Sol (Sun Sq) is lined with bars and eateries and comes to life on long summer nights. The square was the scene of summary executions after an uprising in 1870. During the 1936–9 civil war, an air-raid shelter was installed.
Busy, elongated 7Plaça de la Revolució de Setembre de 1868 commemorates the toppling of Queen Isabel II, a cause of much celebration in this working-class stronghold. Today locals gather on benches for a chat or pop into one of the bars or restaurants for refreshment.
Pleasant terraces adorn pedestrianised 8Plaça de la Virreina, presided over by the 17th-century Església de Sant Joan. It was largely destroyed by anarchists during the unrest of the Setmana Tràgica (Tragic Week) of 1909. Rebuilt by Berenguer, it was damaged again during the civil war.
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

oBOBBY GINCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 368 18 92; www.bobbygin.com; Carrer de Francisco Giner 47; h4pm-2am Sun-Wed, to 2.30am Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mDiagonal)
With over 60 varieties, this whitewashed stone-walled bar is a haven for gin lovers. Try an infusion-based concoction (rose-tea-infused Hendrick’s with strawberries and lime; tangerine-infused Tanqueray 10 with agave nectar and bitter chamomile) or a cocktail like the Santa Maria (chardonnay, milk-thistle syrup, thyme, sage and lemon). Fusion tapas choices include G&T-cured salmon. Shrimp coated in green puffed rice and beef and shiitake wontons are other great options.
oRABIPELAOCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 182 50 35; www.elrabipelao.com; Carrer del Torrent d’En Vidalet 22; h7pm-1.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, 1-4.30pm Sun; mJoanic)
An anchor of Gràcia’s nightlife, Rabipelao is a celebratory space with a shiny disco ball and DJs spinning salsa beats. A silent film plays in one corner beyond the red velvety wallpaper-covered walls and there’s a richly hued mural above the bar. Tropical cocktails like mojitos and caipirinhas pair with South American snacks such as arepas (meat-filled cornbread patties) and ceviche.
ELEPHANTABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 237 69 06; www.elephanta.cat; Carrer del Torrent d’en Vidalet 37; h6pm-1.30am Mon-Wed, to 2.30am Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, to 10pm Sun; W; mJoanic)
Tucked off the main drag, this petite cocktail bar has an old-fashioned vibe, with long plush green banquettes, art-lined walls and a five-seat bar with vintage wood stools. Gin is the drink of choice, with more than 40 varieties on hand, and the cocktails are expertly mixed.
VIBLIOTECAWINE BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 284 42 02; www.viblioteca.com; Carrer de Vallfogona 12; h7pm-midnight; mFontana)
A glass cabinet piled high with ripe cheese (over 50 varieties) entices you into this small, white, cleverly designed contemporary space. The real speciality at Viblioteca, however, is wine, and you can choose from 150 mostly local labels, many of them available by the glass.
LA VERMUTERIA DEL TANOBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 213 10 58; Carrer Joan Blanques 17; h9am-9pm Mon-Fri, noon-4pm Sat & Sun; mJoanic)
Scarcely changed in decades, with barrels on the walls, old fridges with wooden doors, vintage clocks and marble-topped tables, this vermouth bar is a local gathering point. Its house-speciality Peruchi is served traditionally with a glass of carbonated water. Tapas is also traditional, with most dishes utilising ingredients from tins (anchovies, smoked clams, cockles and pickled octopus).
EL SABORBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %674 993075; Carrer de Francisco Giner 32; h9pm-2.30am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mDiagonal)
Ruled since 1992 by the charismatic Havana-born Angelito is this home of ron y son (rum and sound). A mixed crowd of Cubans and fans of the Caribbean island come to drink mojitos and shake their stuff in this diminutive, good-humoured hang-out. Stop by on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays for a free two-hour salsa or bachata lesson (starting at 9.30pm).
BAR CANIGÓBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 213 30 49; www.barcanigo.com; Carrer de Verdi 2; h10am-2am Mon-Thu, 10am-3am Fri, 8pm-3am Sat; mFontana)
Now run by the third generation of owners, this corner bar overlooking Plaça de la Revolució de Setembre de 1868 is an animated spot to sip on a house vermouth or an Estrella beer around rickety old marble-top tables, as people have done here since 1922.
Earlier in the day, it’s a great spot for a coffee.
RAÏMBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer del Progrés 48; h8pm-2am Tue-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mDiagonal)
The walls in Raïm are alive with black-and-white photos of Cubans and Cuba. Weathered old wooden chairs of another epoch huddle around marble tables, while grand old wood-framed mirrors hang from the walls. It draws a friendly, garrulous crowd who pile in for first-rate mojitos and an excellent selection of rum.
LA CIGALECOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 457 58 23; www.facebook.com/la-cigale-barcelona; Carrer de Tordera 50; h6pm-2am Sun-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mJoanic)
La Cigale is a very civilised place for a cocktail, with oil paintings on the walls, gilded mirrors and leatherbound volumes scattered about. Prop up the zinc bar, sink into a secondhand lounge chair around a teeny table or head upstairs.
EL RINCÓN CUBANOBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 143 77 01; Carrer de l’Or 19; h7pm-1am Tue-Thu, 7pm-2am Fri, 6pm-2am Sat, 1pm-midnight Sun; W; mFontana)
Cuban cocktails (including Cuba libres and el presidentes) and beers (Mayabe, Tinima and Cacique) are served alongside authentic snacks such as pasteles (puff pastry with savoury fillings), Cuban sandwiches and ropa vieja (shredded steak in tomato sauce) at this bar with arched brickwork and terracotta-tiled floors. It’s in its element on Sundays from 4pm when live acoustic Cuban music plays.
SOL SOLERBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 172 99 75; Plaça del Sol 21; h11am-2am; mFontana)
With old tile floors, wood panelling and little marble tables, Sol Soler is perfect for a beer, vermouth or Campari overlooking the busy square out front.
CHATELETCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 284 95 90; Carrer de Torrijos 54; h6pm-2.30am Mon-Fri, from noon Sat & Sun; mJoanic)
A popular meeting point in the ‘hood, Chatelet has big windows for watching the passing people parade, and a buzzing art-filled interior that sees a wide cross-section of Gràcia society. Blues and old-school American soul plays in the background. The cocktails are excellent, and the drink prices fair (with discounts before 10pm).
NOU CANDANCHÚBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 237 73 62; Plaça de la Vila de Gràcia 9; h9.30am-1am; mFontana)
Nou Candanchú is a long-time favourite and one of the liveliest spots on Plaça de la Vila de Gràcia. Barcelonins flock to its sunny terrace for a few drinks.
LA VERMUBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 171 80 87; Carrer de Sant Domènec 15; h6.30pm-midnight Mon-Thu, 12.30-4.30pm & 7.30pm-12.30am Fri-Sun; dFGC Gràcia)
House-made negre (black) and blanc (white) vermouth, served with a slice of orange and an olive, is the speciality of this hip neighbourhood hang-out. The airy space with exposed timber beams and industrial lighting centres on a marble bar with seating and surrounding marble-topped tables. Vermouth aside, it also has a small but stellar wine list and stylishly presented tapas.
3ENTERTAINMENT

CINE TEXASCINEMA
(%93 348 77 48; www.cinemestexas.cat; Carrer de Bailèn 205; mJoanic)
All films at this contemporary four-screen cinema are shown in their original languages (with subtitles in Catalan). Genres span art house through to Hollywood blockbusters. Catalan-language films are subtitled in English.
SODA ACÚSTICLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 016 55 90; www.soda.cat; Carrer de les Guilleries 6; tickets from €2; h8pm-2.30am Wed, Thu & Sun, to 3am Fri & Sat; mFontana)
This low-lit modern space stages an eclectic line-up of bands and performing artists. Jazz, world music, Balkan swing, Latin rhythms and plenty of experimental, not easily classifiable musicians all receive their due. The acoustics are excellent. Check the website for upcoming shows.
VERDICINEMA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 238 79 90; www.cines-verdi.com; Carrer de Verdi 32; mFontana)
In the heart of Gràcia, this five-screen cinema shows art-house and blockbuster films in their original language as well as films in Catalan and Spanish. It’s handy to lots of local eateries and bars for pre- and post-film enjoyment.
7 SHOPPING

oCOLMILLO DE MORSAFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %645 206365; www.facebook.com/colmillodemorsa; Carrer de Vic 15-17; h4.30-8.30pm Mon, 11am-2.30pm & 4.30-8.30pm Tue-Sat; dFGC Gràcia)
Design team Javier Blanco and Elisabet Vallecillo have made waves at Madrid’s Cibeles Fashion Week and Paris’ fashion fair Who’s Next, and showcase their Barcelona-made women’s fashion here at their flagship boutique. They’ve also opened the floor to promote other young, up-and-coming local labels. The light-filled space also hosts art, graphic design and photography exhibitions and fashion shows.
Fabrics used by Colmillo de Morsa are all sustainably produced in Europe using non-toxic dyes.
oFAMILY BEERDRINKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 219 29 88; www.family-beer.com; Carrer de Joan Blanques 55; h5-8.30pm Mon, 10am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Tue-Sat; mJoanic)
Over 130 varieties of local and international craft beers and ciders are stocked in the fridges here, so you can pick up a cold brew to go. It also has brewing kits and books, and runs regular brewing workshops (three hours €45) and hosts free demonstrations of cheese making and cookery using beer, as well as ‘meet the brewer’ tastings.
HIBERNIANBOOKS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 47 96; www.hibernian-books.com; Carrer de Montseny 17; h4-8.30pm Mon, 11am-8.30pm Tue-Sat; mFontana)
Barcelona’s biggest secondhand English bookshop stocks thousands of titles covering all sorts of subjects, from cookery to children’s classics. There’s a smaller collection of new books in English too.
CAN LUCCHEESE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 007 47 83; www.canluc.es; Carrer de Berga 4; h5-9pm Mon, 10am-2.30pm & 5-8.30pm Tue-Sat; dFGC Gràcia)
At any one time, this brightly lit shop has 150 different varieties of cheese. Catalan cheeses are the speciality, but you’ll also find a selection from France, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Britain. Expert staff provide guidance. Wines, condiments, crackers and cheese knives are also available. For a gourmet picnic, pre-order a brimming hamper (€25 to €100).
BODEGA BONAVISTAWINE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 81 99; Carrer de Bonavista 10; h10am-2.30pm & 5-9pm Mon-Fri, noon-3pm & 6-9pm Sat, noon-3pm Sun; mFontana)
An excellent little neighbourhood bodega, Bonavista endeavours to seek out great wines at reasonable prices. The stock is mostly from Catalonia and elsewhere in Spain, but there’s also a well-chosen selection from France. The Bonavista also acts as a deli, and there are some especially good cheeses. You can sample wines by the glass, along with cheeses and charcuterie, at one of the in-store tables.
AMALIA VERMELLJEWELLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %655 754008; www.amaliavermell.com; Carrer de Francisco Giner 49; h11am-2pm & 5-9pm Mon-Sat; mDiagonal)
Striking geometric jewellery made from high-quality materials such as sterling silver is handcrafted by Amalia Vermell here in her atelier. Browse for pendants and necklaces, bracelets and rings, or sign up for a jewellery-making course (from €65 for two hours; English available).
VINIL VINTAGEMUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 192 39 99; Carrer de Ramón y Cajal 45-47; h10.30am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Tue-Sat; mJoanic)
Crate diggers will love rummaging through the vinyl collection here. There’s a huge range of rock, pop and jazz, including plenty of Spanish music. It also sells turntables and speakers.
REKUP & COHOMEWARES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %694 472297; www.rekupandco.com; Carrer de Verdi 63; h11am-2.30pm & 5-9pm; mFontana)
Recycled timbers and metals are used by French native Emmanuel Wagnon to create individual works of art that are functional too: chairs, tables, shelves, mirrors, lamps and quirkier items like shutters made from wooden pallets. International shipping can be arranged.
LADY LOQUITACLOTHING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 217 82 92; www.ladyloquita.com; Travessera de Gràcia 126; h11am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mFontana)
At this hip little shop you can browse through light, locally made summer dresses by Tiralahilacha, evening wear by Japamala and handmade jewellery by local design label Klimbim. There are also whimsical odds and ends: dinner plates with dog-people portraits and digital prints on wood by About Paola.
AMAPOLA VEGAN SHOPCLOTHING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 010 62 73; www.amapolaveganshop.com; Travessera de Gràcia 129; h11am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mFontana) S
A shop with a heart of gold, Amapola proves that you need not toss your ethics aside in the quest for stylish clothing and accessories. You’ll find sleek leather-alternatives for wallets, handbags and messenger bags by Matt & Nat, belts by Nae Vic, and elegant scarves by Barts.
TINTIN SHOPGIFTS & SOUVENIRS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 289 25 24; www.tintinshopbcn.com; Travessera de Gràcia 176; h10.30am-2.30pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Fri, 11am-2.30pm Sat; mFontana)
Fans of the Belgian boy wonder should make a beeline to this Gràcia store, where you’ll find Tintin T-shirts, posters, action figures, book bags, wristwatches, pencil cases, and even a soft, irresistible Milou (Tintin’s wire fox terrier, known as Snowy in English) – plus, of course, the books that made him famous (with titles in Catalan, Spanish and French).
LA FESTIVALWINE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 023 22 81; Carrer de Verdi 67; h5-9pm Mon, 10.30am-2.30pm & 5-9pm Tue-Thu, 10.30am-2.30pm & 5-9.30pm Fri & Sat, 10.30am-2.30pm & 5-8pm Sun; mFontana)
Knowledgeable English-speaking staff can give you a wealth of information about the excellent wines for sale here. Most are from Spanish producers, though there are a few French labels, and some organic and biodynamic wines. You can refill your bottle with wine or vermouth from one of the casks at the front, starting at €3 a bottle.
PICNICCLOTHING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 016 69 53; www.picnicstore.es; Carrer de Verdi 17; h11am-9pm Mon-Fri, 11am-3pm & 4-9pm Sat; mFontana)
This tiny, beautifully curated boutique has many temptations: stylish sneakers by Meyba (a Barcelona brand), striped jerseys from Basque label Loreak Mendian and boldly patterned Mödernaked backpacks. Other finds include animal-print ceramics for the home, small-scale art prints and fashion mags.
SURCOMUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 34 39; www.facebook.com/surcobcn; Travessera de Gràcia 144; h10.30am-2pm & 5.30-9pm Mon-Sat; mFontana)
Surco is an obligatory stop for music lovers, especially fans of vinyl. You’ll find loads of new and used records and CDs here, with a mix of Tom Waits, Mishima (a Catalan indie pop band), Calexico and more.
MUSHI MUSHIFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 292 29 74; www.mushimushicollection.com; Carrer de Bonavista 12; h11am-3pm & 4.30-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mDiagonal)
A gorgeous little fashion boutique in an area that’s not short of them, Mushi Mushi specialises in quirky but elegant women’s fashion and accessories. It stocks small labels such as Des Petits Hauts, Sessùn and Orion London, as well as jewellery by Adriana Llorens. The collection changes frequently, so a return visit can pay off.
NOSTÀLGICPHOTOGRAPHY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 368 57 57; www.nostalgic.es; Carrer de Goya 18; h10.30am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri, 11am-2.30pm Sat; mFontana)
In a beautiful space with exposed brick walls and wooden furniture, Nostàlgic specialises in all kinds of modern and vintage photography equipment. You’ll find camera bags and tripods for the digital snappers, rolls of film, and quirky Lomo cameras. There is also a decent collection of photography books to buy or browse.
MERCAT DE L’ABACERIA CENTRALMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.mercatsbcn.cat; Travessera de Gràcia 186; h7am-2.30pm & 5.30-8pm Mon-Sat; mFontana, dFGC Gràcia)
Dating from 1892, this sprawling iron and brick market is an atmospheric place to browse for fresh produce, cheeses, bakery items and more. There are also several food stalls where you can grab a quick bite on the cheap.
BEGIFTS & SOUVENIRS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 89 49; www.bethestore.com; Carrer de Bonavista 7; h10.30am-9pm Mon-Sat; mDiagonal)
Be is a fun place to browse for accessories and gift ideas. You’ll find rugged vintage-looking satchels, leather handbags, stylish (and reflective) Happy Socks, portable record players, sneakers (Vans, Pumas, old-school Nikes) and gadgets (including richly hued Pantone micro speakers and Polaroid digital cameras).
2SPORTS & ACTIVITIES

AQUA URBAN SPASPA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 238 41 60; www.aquaurbanspa.es; Carrer Gran de Gràcia 7; 90min baths session from €51; h9am-9pm Mon-Sat; mDiagonal)
With treatments for everything from stress to tired legs (merciful for diehard sightseers), this spa offers smallish pool and shower areas, along with steam baths, Roman-style baths and a series of massages and beauty treatment options such as body scrubs (from €39 for 30 minutes).




Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta

Neighbourhood Top Five

1 Camp Nou Reliving the great moments of one of the world’s legendary football teams at the multimedia museum – or, better yet, cheering along with their fans during a live game.
2 Museu-Monestir de Pedralbes Walking along the 14th-century cloister and gazing at exquisite murals at this convent turned museum.
3 CosmoCaixa Getting a feel for the Amazon (tropical downpour and all), and travelling through Earth’s evolution at warp speed at this excellent science museum.
4 Bellesguard Gazing upon Gaudí’s imposing, medieval-like masterpiece with its crenellated walls, stained glass and ornate ironwork.
5 Tibidabo Travelling by tram and funicular railway up to this forested mountain for lovely views and an old-fashioned amusement park.
Explore Camp Nou, Pedralbes & La Zona Alta
This vast area, which runs north of L’Eixample and west of Gràcia, includes some intriguing attractions. Yet few visitors make the journey here, due to the area’s relative remoteness and the longer distances between sights. On the upside, you’ll have the chance to explore Barcelona off the tourist path.
Framing the north end of La Zona Alta (the High Zone) are the Collserola hills. Rugged Parc de Collserola attracts cyclists, runners and walkers, and has a sprinkling of historic sites.
Upmarket Pedralbes has a mix of high-end gated residences and boxy apartment buildings, peaceful streets and manicured gardens hidden off the busy thoroughfares. Standouts include an atmospheric monastery, the elegant Jardins del Palau de Pedralbes and Gaudí’s little-visited Pavellons Güell .
Just south of Pedralbes is Camp Nou, the home of FC Barcelona, one of the world’s best football teams.
To the northeast lies Sarrià, a quaint neighbourhood of brick streets, tiny plazas and medieval buildings. Another area well worth exploring is nearby Sant Gervasi; with its handful of upmarket restaurants and bars.
Local Life
AOutdoor pursuits Head up into the hills to join locals running, mountain biking and picnicking in the sprawling Parc de Collserola.
ANightlife Plaça de la Concòrdia is a charming spot for drinks and tapas at bars such as El Maravillas before a recital or mini-exhibition at Centre Cívic Can Deu.
AVillage days The picturesque narrow lanes of Sarrià are idyllic for a stroll, stopping for cakes at Foix De Sarrià, tapas at Bar Tomàs and a great meal on the leafy terrace at Vivanda.
Getting There & Away
AMetro Línia 3 is handy for the Jardins del Laberint d’Horta (Mundet), and Camp Nou and Palau Reial de Pedralbes (Palau Reial).
ATrain FGC trains are handy for getting close to sights in and around Tibidabo and Parc de Collserola.
ATram Outside Avinguda Tibidabo station, the tramvia blau runs to Plaça del Doctor Andreu, where you can catch an onward funicular up to Tibidabo. Trams T1, T2 and T3 serve the area’s southwest, linking Camp Nou and Palau Reial with Plaça de Francesc Macià.
AFunicular Two funicular railways provide hilltop access: the Funicular del Tibidabo runs between Plaça del Doctor Andreu and Plaça del Doctor Tibidabo. The Funicular de Vallvidrera runs between Peu del Funicular and Vallvidrera Superior.
Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
To make the most of the neighbourhood, try to visit on a weekend. Saturday and Sunday are the most reliable days for getting a tour (offered in English) inside the Pavellons Güell, near Palau Reial de Pedralbes. It’s also the best time to travel to Tibidabo via the 1901-built tramvia blau, which runs daily from June to early September and on weekends year-round.
5 Best Places to Eat
AAcontraluz
AAspic
ALa Balsa
AVia Veneto
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
ADō Bar
AEl Maravillas
AMirablau
For reviews, see here.
1 Best Parks & Gardens
AParc de Collserola
AJardins del Laberint d’Horta
AJardins del Palau de Pedralbes
AParc de la Creueta del Coll

TOP SIGHT
CAMP NOU
While nothing compares to the excitement of attending a live match, the Camp Nou Experience is a must for football fans. On this self-guided visit of FC Barcelona’s home ground, you’ll get an in-depth look at the club, starting with a museum filled with multimedia exhibits, trophies and historical displays, followed by a tour of the stadium.

DON’T MISS

AHearing the rousing anthem sung before FC Barcelona takes the field
AThe museum’s footage of the team’s best goals
AA self-guided tour of the stadium
PRACTICALITIES

AMAP GOOGLE MAP, C8
A%902 189900
Awww.fcbarcelona.com
AGate 9, Avinguda de Joan XXIII
Aadult/child €25/20
Ah9.30am-7.30pm Apr-Sep, 10am-6.30pm Mon-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun Oct-Mar
AmPalau Reial
Camp Nou Experience Museum
Camp Nou Experience begins in FC Barcelona’s museum, which provides a high-tech view into the club. Massive touchscreens allow visitors to explore arcane aspects of the legendary team. You can also watch videos of particularly artful goals. Displays delve into the club’s history, its social commitment and connection to Catalan identity, and in-depth stats of on-field action. Sound installations include the club’s anthem (with translations in many languages) and the match-day roar of the amped-up crowds.
The museum’s highlights are the photo section, the goal videos and the views out over the stadium. You can admire the golden boots (in at least one case literally) of great goal scorers of the past and learn about the greats who have played for the club over the years, including Maradona, Ronaldinho, Kubala and many others. A special area is devoted to Lionel Messi, considered by many to be the world’s greatest footballer playing the game today.
The Stadium
Gazing out across Camp Nou is an experience in itself. The stadium, built in 1957 and enlarged for the 1982 World Cup, is one of the world’s biggest, holding almost 100,000 people. The club has a world-record membership of 173,000. After renovations that will last until 2022 (the stadium will remain open throughout), Camp Nou will have a capacity of 105,000.
The self-guided tour of the stadium takes in the team’s dressing rooms, heads out through the tunnel, on to the pitch and winds up in the presidential box. You’ll also get to visit the television studio, the press room and the commentary boxes. Set aside about 2½ hours for the whole visit.
To make the tour, enter at Gate 9 (Avinguda de Joan XXIII near Carrer de Martí i Franquès).
Getting Tickets
Tickets to FC Barcelona matches are available at Camp Nou, online (through FC Barcelona’s official website), and through various city locations. Tourist offices sell them – the main office at Plaça de Catalunya is a centrally located option – as do FC Botiga stores. Tickets can cost anything from €39 to upwards of €250, depending on the seat and match. On match day the ticket windows open from 9.15am until kick off. Tickets for matches with Real Madrid sell out years in advance.
If you attend a game, go early so you’ll have ample time to find your seat (this stadium is massive) and soak up the atmosphere.
You will almost definitely find scalpers lurking near the ticket windows. They are often club members and can sometimes get you in at a significant reduction. Don’t pay until you are safely seated.

TOP SIGHT
MUSEU-MONESTIR DE PEDRALBES
Dating from medieval times, this atmospheric convent is now a museum of monastic life. Perched at the top of busy Avinguda de Pedralbes in what was once unpeopled countryside, the monastery remains a divinely quiet corner of Barcelona and is full of architectural treasures. Adjoining the monastery is the sober church, an excellent example of Catalan Gothic.


JOAN_BAUTISTA/SHUTTERSTOCK ©
DON’T MISS

AFerrer Bassá’s murals
AThe three-storey Gothic cloister
AThe refectory’s admonishing inscriptions
PRACTICALITIES

AMAP GOOGLE MAP, B5
A%93 256 34 34
Ahttp://monestirpedralbes.bcn.cat
ABaixada del Monestir 9
Aadult/child €5/free, after 3pm Sun free
Ah10am-5pm Tue-Fri, to 7pm Sat, to 8pm Sun Apr-Sep, 10am-2pm Tue-Fri, to 5pm Sat & Sun Oct-Mar
Ag63, 68, 75, 78, H4, dFGC Reina Elisenda
The Cloister & Chapel
The architectural highlight is the large, elegant, three-storey cloister, a jewel of Catalan Gothic, built in the early 14th century. Following its course to the right, stop at the first chapel, the Capella de Sant Miquel, the murals of which were done in 1346 by Ferrer Bassá, one of Catalonia’s earliest documented painters. A few steps on is the ornamental grave of Queen Elisenda, who founded the convent. Curiously, it’s divided in two: the side in the cloister shows her dressed as a penitent widow, while the other part, an alabaster masterpiece inside the adjacent church, shows her dressed as queen.
The Refectory & Sleeping Quarters
As you head around the ground floor of the cloister, you can peer into the restored refectory, kitchen, stables, stores and a reconstruction of the infirmary – all giving a good idea of convent life. Eating in the refectory must not have been a whole lot of fun, judging by the inscriptions around the walls exhorting Silentium (Silence) and Audi Tacens (Listen and Keep Quiet).
Upstairs is a grand hall that was once the dormidor (sleeping quarters). It was lined by tiny night cells, but they were long ago removed. Today a modest collection of the monastery’s art, especially Gothic devotional works, and furniture grace this space.
1SIGHTS

CAMP NOU EXPERIENCEMUSEUM
MAP GOOGLE MAP; See here.
MUSEU-MONESTIR DE PEDRALBESMONASTERY
See here.
JARDINS DEL PALAU DE PEDRALBESPARK
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Avinguda Diagonal 686; h10am-9pm Apr-Oct, to 7pm Nov-Mar; mPalau Reial)
A few steps from busy Avinguda Diagonal lies this small enchanting green space. Sculptures, fountains, citrus trees, bamboo groves, fragrant eucalyptus, towering cypresses and bougainvillea-covered nooks lie scattered along the paths criss-crossing these peaceful gardens. Among the little-known treasures here are a vine-covered parabolic pergola and a gurgling fountain of Hercules (buried in thick vegetation before being rediscovered in 1984), both designed by Antoni Gaudí.
At the north end of the park is the Palau Reial de Pedralbes, an early-20th-century building that belonged to the family of Eusebi Güell (Gaudí’s patron) until they handed it over to the city in 1926 to serve as a royal residence. Past guests include King Alfonso XIII, the president of Catalonia and General Franco. The palau (palace) itself is closed to the public.
PARC DE LA CREUETA DEL COLLPARK
(Passeig de la Mare de Déu del Coll 77; h10am-9pm Apr-Oct, to 7pm Nov-Mar; g92, 129, N5, mPenitents)
A favourite with families, this refreshing public park has a meandering, splashing lake pool, along with swings, showers and a snack bar. Only the pool closes outside summer. The park is set inside a deep crater left by long years of stone quarrying, with an enormous concrete sculpture, Elogio del agua (In Praise of Water) by Eduardo Chillida, suspended on one side.
Enter from Carrer Mare de Déu del Coll, a 1km walk east from the Penitents metro station.
Views of the city and Tibidabo extend from the hilly trails.
BELLESGUARDARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 250 40 93; www.bellesguardgaudi.com; Carrer de Bellesguard 16; adult/child €9/free; h10am-3pm Tue-Sun; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
This Gaudí masterpiece was rescued from obscurity and opened to the public in 2013. Built between 1900 and 1909, this private residence (still owned by the original Guilera family) has a castle-like appearance with crenellated walls of stone and brick, narrow stained-glass windows, elaborate ironwork and a soaring turret mounted by a Gaudían cross. It’s a fascinating work that combines both Gothic and Modernista elements.
Guided tours in English (€16 per person) take place on weekends at 11am. At other times, you can visit the interior of the building and the grounds with an audioguide that gives historical background.
The downside: it’s a long walk to a train station, though many buses pass near (including bus 22 and bus 58 from Plaça de Catalunya). Be sure to call before making the trek out – Bellesguard sometimes closes for private events.
PAVELLONS GÜELLARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 317 76 52; Avinguda de Pedralbes 7; guided tours adult/child €5/2.50; h10am-4pm; mPalau Reial)
These stables and porter’s lodge were designed by Gaudí for the Finca Güell, as the Güell estate here was called. The structures here were built between 1884 and 1887, when Gaudí was strongly impressed by Islamic architecture. You can peer inside on guided visits, with English-language tours at 10.15am, 11.15pm and 3pm. Unexpected closures can occur, so confirm opening hours before heading out.
One of the most eye-catching features is the fantastical wrought-iron dragon gate near Avinguda de Pedralbes.
CENTRE CÍVIC CAN DEUCULTURAL CENTRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 410 10 07; www.cccandeu.com; Plaça de la Concòrdia 13; h9am-10pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun, closed Aug; mNumància)
Set in a late-19th-century neo-Gothic mansion, this cultural centre stages concerts, exhibitions and workshops throughout the year. Its cafe opens to a peaceful plaza.
OBSERVATORI FABRAOBSERVATORY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 417 57 36; www.fabra.cat; Carretera del Observatori; tours €2, night observation €15-25; htours 11am-2pm Sun, night observation by reservation Fri & Sat Oct-Jun; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
Inaugurated in 1904, this Modernista observatory 415m above sea level is still a functioning scientific foundation. On certain evenings visitors can observe the stars through its grand old telescope (check the website for the latest schedule). Visits, generally in Catalan or Spanish, must be pre-booked. From mid-June to mid-September, Sopars amb Estrelles offers an evening of high-end dining and astronomy.
COL·LEGI DE LES TERESIANESARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer de Ganduxer 85-105; dFGC Les Tres Torres)
This striking work by Gaudí has exposed brick pillars and steep catenary arches, each of which is unique. It was built in 1889 for the Order of St Teresa. The interior is closed to the public.

TOP SIGHT
COSMOCAIXA
One of the city’s most popular attractions, this science museum is a favourite with kids (and kids at heart). Its centrepiece is the recreation of over 1 sq km of flooded Amazon rainforest (Bosc Inundat), where more than 100 flora and fauna species – including anacondas, colourful poisonous frogs and caimans – thrive. It’s even possible to watch a tropical downpour in this unique, living diorama. Another highlight is the Mur Geològic: seven great chunks of rock (90 metric tons in all) that have been assembled to create the Geological Wall.
Also worthwhile are the 3D shows in the Planetari (Planetarium), which are screened several times a day. Shows typically run for 35 minutes; headsets provide commentary in English and other languages. Various guided tours are also available.
Other displays cover many fascinating areas of science, from fossils to physics, and from the alphabet to outer space.
The bulk of the museum is underground. Outside, there’s a nice stroll through the extensive Plaça de la Ciència, whose modest garden flourishes with Mediterranean flora.
DON’T MISS

AA tropical storm in the Amazon
AThe Geological Wall
AThe Planetarium
PRACTICALITIES

AMuseu de la Ciència
AMAP, D2
A%93 212 60 50
Awww.cosmocaixa.com
ACarrer d’Isaac Newton 26
Aadult/child €4/free, guided tours from €2, planetarium €4
Ah10am-8pm Tue-Sun
Ag60, 196
5EATING

LA FERMATA DE SARRIÀPIZZA€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 84 02; www.lafermata.es; Carrer Major de Sarrià 2-4; pizza per kg €14-28; h12.30-4pm & 7.30-11pm; g66,130, dFGC Sarrià)
Rectangular pizza slices are sold al taglio (by weight) at this little pizzeria run by a Rome-trained chef, and come in an array of classic and Catalonian-inspired toppings (150 varieties altogether, though not at the same time). It’s perfect for picking up takeaway, but there’s also a counter with stool seating and a handful of tables on the pavement.
LA BURGBURGERS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 205 63 48; www.laburg.com; Passeig de Sant Joan Bosco 55; burgers €7-15.50; h1-4pm & 8-11.30pm Mon-Wed, 1-4pm & 8pm-midnight Thu, 1-4.30pm & 8pm-midnight Fri & Sat, 1.30-4pm & 8-11.30pm Sun; W; gV7, dFGC Sarrià) S
Wines by the glass or bottle at this sleek spot pair with gourmet burgers made from organic, farm-to-table ingredients. Cheese lovers should try La Quesos (alpine-bred beef, Emmental, Gouda and Manchego); other standouts from the 13 choices include La Sarrià (veal, porcini mushrooms, fried egg and black truffle shavings). Buns are handmade; gluten-free options are available.
MITJA VIDATAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.morrofi.cat; Carrer de Brusi 39; tapas €3-7; h6-11pm Mon-Thu, noon-4pm & 6-11pm Fri & Sat, noon-4pm Sun, closed Aug; dFGC Sant Gervasi)
A young, fun, mostly local crowd gathers around the stainless-steel tapas bar of tiny Mitja Vida. It’s a jovial eating and drinking spot, with good-sized portions of anchovies, calamari, smoked herring, cheeses and mojama (salt-cured tuna). The drink of choice is house-made vermouth.
SANTAMASACATALAN€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 676 35 74; www.santamasarestaurant.com; Carrer Major de Sarrià 97; dishes €6.50-13; h8am-midnight Mon-Fri, 9am-midnight Sat & Sun; dFGC Reina Elisenda)
Next door to Sarrià’s pretty 18th-century church Sant Vicenç de Sarrià, Santamasa is an enticing spot for a light meal at any time of day. The menu here is wide-ranging, with a mix of creatively topped pizzetes (small pizzas), salads, open-faced sandwiches, fondue, burgers, quesadillas and good sharing appetisers like hummus and guacamole.
FLASH FLASHSPANISH€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 237 09 90; www.flashflashbarcelona.com; Carrer de la Granada del Penedès 25; dishes €6.30-13.80; h1pm-1.30am; v; dFGC Gràcia)
Decorated with black-and-white murals and an all-white interior, Flash Flash has a fun and kitschy pop-art aesthetic that harks back to its opening in 1970. Fluffy tortillas are the speciality, with more than 50 varieties, as well as massive bunless hamburgers.
FOIX DE SARRIÀBAKERY€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 203 04 73; www.foixdesarria.com; Plaça de Sarrià 12-13; pastries €2-5; h8am-9pm; dFGC Reina Elisenda)
Since 1886 this exclusive pastry shop has been selling the most exquisite cakes and sweets. You can take them away or head out the back to sip tea, coffee or hot chocolate while sampling little cakes and other baking wizardry.
BAR TOMÀSTAPAS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 203 10 77; www.eltomasdesarria.com; Carrer Major de Sarrià 49; tapas €2.50-7; hnoon-4pm & 6-10pm Mon-Sat; dFGC Sarrià)
Many barcelonins swear Bar Tomàs is the best place in the city for patatas bravas (potato chunks) served with its house-speciality garlic aioli. Despite the fluorescent lights and low-key service, folks from all walks of life pile in, particularly for lunch on weekends. Fried artichokes, anchovies and other snacks also go nicely with an ice-cold beer.
COMAXURROSCHURROS€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 417 94 05; www.comaxurros.com; Carrer de Muntaner 562; churros from €2; h4.30-8.30pm Tue, 9am-2pm & 4.30-8.30pm Wed-Fri, 9am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Sat & Sun; dFGC El Putxet)
At this eye-catching little cafe, brought to you by Barcelona’s famous pastelería Canals, the humble churro receives a dramatic makeover: it’s fried in olive oil to crispy (healthier) perfection and served with unique fillings and toppings (pistachio, strawberry sauce, dark chocolate). Savoury churros include cheese, mushrooms and jamón ibérico (Iberian ham), among other delicacies.
oACONTRALUZMEDITERRANEAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 203 06 58; www.acontraluz.com; Carrer del Milanesat 19; mains €15-27; h1.30-4pm & 8.30pm-midnight Mon-Sat, 1.30-4pm Sun; dFGC Les Tres Torres)
The most magical place to dine at this romantic restaurant is in the bougainvillea-draped, tree-filled garden, reached by an arbour. Olive-crusted monkfish with caramelised fennel, black paella with squid and clams, and suckling pig with fig jam are all outstanding choices. Don’t miss the rum-soaked carrot cake with cardamom ice cream for dessert.
BANGKOK CAFETHAI€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 339 32 69; Carrer d’Evarist Arnús 65; mains €10-14; h8-11pm Mon-Wed, 1-3.45pm & 8-11pm Thu-Sun; mPlaça del Centre)
If you’re craving Thai cuisine, it’s well worth making the trip out to Bangkok Cafe, which serves up spicy green papaya salad, tam yam kung (spicy prawn soup), crispy prawns with plum sauce, red curries and other standouts, with more spice than you’ll find in most Catalan eateries.
It’s a small, buzzing place with an open kitchen, photos of the Thai royals, blackboard specials and an oversized chandelier. Enter from the side lane.
A WANDER THROUGH OLD SARRIÀ

Hugging the left flank of busy main road Via Augusta, the old centre of Sarrià is a largely pedestrianised haven of peace. Probably founded in the 13th century and incorporated into Barcelona only in 1921, ancient Sarrià is formed around sinuous Carrer Major de Sarrià, today a mix of old and new, with a sprinkling of shops and restaurants.
At the street’s top end is pretty Plaça de Sarrià (from where Passeig de la Reina Elisenda de Montcada leads west to the medieval Museu-Monestir de Pedralbes), where you’ll want to check out Foix De Sarrià, an exclusive pastry shop. As you wander downhill, duck off into Plaça del Consell de la Vila, Plaça de Sant Vicenç de Sarrià and Carrer de Rocaberti, at the end of which is the Monestir de Santa Isabel, with a neo-Gothic cloister. Built in 1886 to house Clarissan nuns, whose order first set up in El Raval in the 16th century, it was abandoned during the civil war and used as an air-raid shelter.
oASPICCAFE, DELI€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 200 04 35; www.aspic.es; Avinguda de Pau Casals 24; dishes €9-19.50; hcafe 11am-1.30pm & 6-8.30pm Tue-Sat, 11am-4pm Sun, deli 9am-8pm Tue-Sat, to 4pm Sun, bar to midnight Tue-Sat, to 4pm Sun; Wv; jT1, T2, T3 Francesc Macià)
Luxury ingredients (smoked salmon, premium charcuterie and cheeses, high-grade olive oils and carefully chosen Spanish wines) are utilised at the flagship cafe of this Barcelona caterer in stunning dishes like local carrelet fish with cockle foam and broccoli purée. The attached deli is perfect for picking up items for a gourmet picnic in nearby Jardins del Poeta Eduard Marquina.
VIVANDACATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 203 19 18; www.vivanda.cat; Carrer Major de Sarrià 134; sharing plates €9-21; h1.30-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm Tue-Sat, 1.30-3.30pm Sun; dFGC Reina Elisenda)
With a menu designed by acclaimed Catalan chef Jordi Vilà, diners are in for a treat at this Sarrià classic. Changing dishes showcase seasonal fare, such as eggs with truffles, rice with cuttlefish, and artichokes with romesco sauce. Hidden behind the restaurant is the tree-shaded terrace with terracotta tiles and white-clothed tables.
It’s open year-round – heat lamps are switched on in winter, and blankets and hot broth are distributed to diners.
5º PINOCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Quinto Pino; %93 252 22 81; www.quintopino.es; Passeig de la Bonanova 98; sandwiches €8-13, tapas €1.50-7.50; hkitchen 8.30am-midnight Mon-Fri, 10am-midnight Sat, bar to 1.30am; c; dFGC Sarrià)
While exploring Sarrià, it’s worth detouring a few blocks east to this charming cafe and restaurant, which is a favourite local spot for tasty sandwiches, salads, tortillas, tapas and drinks. It’s on a busy road, though the outdoor pine-shaded terrace is still a pleasant spot for a bite.
EL ASADOR DE ARANDASPANISH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 417 01 15; www.asadordearanda.net; Avinguda del Tibidabo 31; tapas €6-16.50, mains €15-22.50; h1-4.30pm & 8-11.30pm; W; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
Set in a striking Modernista building, complete with stained-glass windows, Moorish-style brick arches and elaborate ceilings, El Asador de Aranda’s most popular seats are on the landscaped terrace. You’ll find a fine assortment of tapas plates for sharing, though the speciality is the meat (roast lamb, spare ribs, beef), prepared in a wood-fired oven.
AJOBLANCOCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 667 87 66; www.ajoblancorestaurant.com; Carrer de Tuset 20; tapas €7.50-19, mains €14-21; h8pm-1am Mon-Wed, to 3am Thu-Sat, noon-1am Sun; v; dFGC Gràcia)
This beautifully designed, timber-furnished space serves up a mix of classic and creative tapas plates that go nicely with the imaginative cocktail menu. Sip the house vermouth while dining on crispy artichoke hearts with romesco sauce, slow-roasted lamb shoulder, or wild sea bass ceviche with mango and chilli. Live music or DJs play from Wednesday to Saturday.
LA MOLINACATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 417 11 24; www.restaurantemolina.net; Passeig de Sant Gervasi 65; mains €12.50-18; h9am-5pm & 8pm-midnight Mon-Fri, 11am-5pm Sat & Sun; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
La Molina looks like a typical tapas bar at first glance – pavement tables, nondescript bar in front – but head to the back room and you’ll discover one of the great unsung Catalan restaurants in the neighbourhood. Reservations are recommended of an evening.
oLA BALSAMEDITERRANEAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 211 50 48; www.labalsarestaurant.com; Carrer de la Infanta Isabel 4; mains €20-28; h1.30-3.30pm & 8.30-10.30pm Tue-Sat, 1.30-3.30pm Sun; W; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
With its grand ceiling and the scented gardens that surround the main terrace dining area, La Balsa is one of the city’s premier dining addresses. The seasonally changing menu is a mix of traditional Catalan and creative expression (suckling pig with melon; cod confit with prune compote). Lounge over a cocktail at the bar before being directed to your table.
oVIA VENETOGASTRONOMY€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 200 72 44; www.viaveneto.es; Carrer de Ganduxer 10; mains €28-52.50; h1-4pm & 8-11.45pm Mon-Fri, 8-11.45pm Sat, closed Aug; dFGC La Bonanova)
Dalí was a regular in this high-society restaurant after it opened in 1967, and you can still dine at his favourite table today. The oval mirrors, orange-rose tablecloths, leather chairs and fine cutlery set the stage for intricate dishes such as smoked oysters with minced black bread and red mullet with chargrilled onion leaves.
The cellar has over 1800 wines from Catalonia and throughout Spain.
WORTH A DETOUR
JARDINS DEL LABERINT D’HORTA

Laid out in the late 18th century by Antoni Desvalls, Marquès d’Alfarràs i de Llupià, this carefully manicured park (%93 413 24 00; http://lameva.barcelona.cat; Passeig del Castanyers 1; adult/child €2.23/1.42, free Wed & Sun; h10am-8pm Apr-Oct, to 7pm Dec-Mar; mMundet) remained a private family idyll until the 1970s, when it was opened to the public. The laberint (‘labyrinth’ in Catalan) refers to the central maze; other paths take you past a pleasant artificial lake, waterfalls, a neoclassical pavilion and a false cemetery. The last is inspired by 19th-century romanticism, characterised by an obsession with a swooning vision of death.
The labyrinth, in the middle of these cool gardens (somehow odd in this environment, with modern apartments and ring roads nearby), can be surprisingly frustrating. Aim to reach the centre from the bottom end, and then exit towards the ponds and neoclassical pavilion. This is a good one for kids. Scenes of the film adaptation of Patrick Süskind’s novel Perfume were shot in the gardens.
To reach the gardens, take the right exit upstairs at Mundet metro station; on emerging, turn right and then left along the main road (with football fields on your left), then the first left uphill to the gardens (about five minutes).
HISOPMEDITERRANEAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 241 32 33; www.hisop.com; Passatge de Marimon 9; mains €24-28.50; h1.30-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm Mon-Fri, 8.30-11pm Sat; mDiagonal)
Black, white and burgundy dominate the dining room decor at this elegant little Michelin-starred eatery just off the beaten path. The seasonal menu is a work of art that might feature elderflower, fennel and grappa-marinated duck, grilled turbot with pistachio-stuffed jalapeño peppers and olive-oil-poached peach with caramelised ginger.
ABACCATALAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 319 66 00; www.abacrestaurant.com; Avinguda del Tibidabo 1; tasting menus €140-170, with wine €215-265; h1.30-3pm & 8.30-10pm; dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
Led by celebrated chef Jordi Cruz, this triple-Michelin-starred restaurant offers one of Barcelona’s most memorable dining experiences (and also one of its priciest). Expect creative, mouth-watering perfection in dishes like sherry consommé with tuna marrow, foie gras tacos, fossilised sea urchins with plankton butter and Bloody Mary macarons. Reservations are essential.
CAN CORTADACATALAN€€€
(%93 427 23 15; www.cancortada.com; Avinguda de l’Estatut de Catalunya; mains €21.50-29; h1-4pm & 8-11pm; mMundet)
The setting and the hearty welcome make this 11th-century estate (complete with the remains of a defensive tower) worth the excursion. Grilled meats dominate, though you’ll also find seasonal dishes like artichokes fired up on the grill and calçots (spring onions) in winter. Try for a table in the former cellars or on the garden terrace.
HOFMANNMEDITERRANEAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 218 71 65; www.hofmann-bcn.com; Carrer de la Granada del Penedès 14; mains €23-37; h1.30-3.45pm Mon-Fri & 9-11pm Mon-Sat; dFGC Gràcia)
Trainee chefs run the kitchen here, helped along by their instructors. Dishes are generally elegant renditions of classic Mediterranean food (pork trotters with foie gras and truffled port jus; smoked eel with black garlic consommé), followed by such delicious desserts that some people prefer a starter and two sweets, skipping the main course altogether.
SOPARS AMB ESTRELLESCATALAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Dinner under the Stars; %93 327 01 21; www.sternalia.com; Carretera del Observatori; meal & observatory packages €71-125; hmid-Jun–mid-Sep; vc)
Held at the Observatori Fabra, this astronomical evening includes an outdoor meal, a tour of the observatory, telescope viewing and a lecture on the heavens. The evening starts at 8.30pm and ends at midnight. Prices vary based on type of menu ordered; vegetarian and kids’ menus are available. Reservations are essential. The easiest way here is by taxi.
WORTH A DETOUR
TIBIDABO: GARDENS OF EARTHLY DELIGHTS

Framing the north end of the city, the forest-covered mountain of Tibidabo, which tops out at 512m, is the highest peak in Serra de Collserola. Aside from the superb views from the top, highlights include an 8000-hectare park, the Parc de Collserola MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 280 35 52; www.parcnaturalcollserola.cat; Carretera de l’Església 92; hCentre d’Informació 9.30am-3pm, Can Coll 9.30am-2.30pm Sun & holidays, closed late Jun-early Sep); an old-fashioned amusement park, Parc d’Atraccions MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 211 79 42; www.tibidabo.cat; Plaça de Tibidabo 3-4; adult/child €28.50/10.30; hclosed Jan & Feb); the Torre de Collserola MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 406 93 54; www.torredecollserola.com; Carretera de Vallvidrera al Tibidabo; adult/child €5.60/3.30; hhours vary, closed Jan-Feb) telecommunications tower with viewing platform; and a looming basilica, Basílica del Sagrat Cor de Jesús MAP GOOGLE MAP; (Basilica of the Sacred Heart of Jesus; MAP; %93 417 56 86; www.templotibidabo.es; Plaça de Tibidabo; lift €3.50; h11am-7pm) F, which is visible from many parts of the city. Tibidabo gets its name from the devil, who, trying to tempt Christ, took him to a high place and said, in Latin: ‘Haec omnia tibi dabo si cadens adoraberis me’ (‘All this I will give you if you fall down and worship me’).
To reach the basilica and amusement park, take an FGC train to Avinguda Tibidabo. Outside Avinguda Tibidabo station, hop on the tramvia blau, which runs past fancy Modernista mansions to Plaça del Doctor Andreu (one way €5.50, 15 minutes, every 15 or 30 minutes 10am to 7.30pm daily late June to early September, 10am to 6.15pm Saturday, Sunday and holidays early September to late June; hours can vary). Bus 196 runs the same route. From Plaça del Doctor Andreu the Tibidabo funicular railway climbs to the top of the hill (return €7.70, five minutes). Departures start around 10am and run every 15 minutes until shortly after the Parc d’Atraccions’ closing time. Start queuing well before the funicular stops running, as places are limited.
An alternative is bus T2A, the ‘Tibibús’, from Plaça de Catalunya to Plaça de Tibidabo (€3, 30 minutes, every 30 to 50 minutes on Saturday, Sunday and holidays March to December, and hourly from 10.15am Monday to Friday late June to early September).
For Parc de Collserola, take an FGC train to Baixador de Vallvidrera. Alternatively, you can stop one station earlier at Peu del Funicular and ride to the top via the Funicular Vallvidrera.
Bus 111 runs between Tibidabo and Vallvidrera (passing the Torre de Collserola).
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

EL MARAVILLASCOCKTAIL BAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 360 73 78; www.elmaravillas.cat; Plaça de la Concòrdia 15; hnoon-midnight Mon & Tue, to 1am Wed, to 2am Thu, to 3am Fri-Sun; mMaria Cristina, jT1, T2, T3 Numància)
Overlooking the peaceful Plaça de la Concòrdia, El Maravillas feels like a secret hideaway – especially if you’ve just arrived from the crowded lanes of the Ciutat Vella (Old City). The glittering bar has just a few tables, plus outdoor seating on the square in warm weather. Creative cocktails, good Spanish red wines and easy-drinking vermouths are the drinks of choice.
MIRABLAUBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 418 58 79; www.mirablaubcn.com; Plaça del Doctor Andreu; h11am-3.30am Mon-Wed, 11am-4.30am Thu, 10am-5am Fri-Sat, 10am-2.30am Sun; g196, dFGC Avinguda Tibidabo)
Gaze out over the entire city from this privileged balcony restaurant at the base of the Funicular del Tibidabo. The bar is renowned for its gin selection, with 30 different varieties. Wander downstairs to join the folk in the tiny dance space, which opens at 11.30pm. In summer you can step out onto the even smaller terrace for a breather.
CAFE TURÓCAFE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer del Tenor Viñas 1; h8am-midnight; g68, jT1, T2, T3 Francesc Macià)
Framed by red awnings, with vivid crimson walls brightening the low-lit interior, this cafe on the edge of Turó Parc has year-round seating on the footpath at the front – ideal for catching some sun over a morning coffee, afternoon glass of wine or evening cocktail. There’s a good selection of bistro plates and tapas.
DŌ BARBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 209 18 88; www.do-bcn.com; Carrer de Santaló 30; h7pm-midnight Tue-Thu, 8pm-1am Fri & Sat; W; dFGC Muntaner)
This neighbourhood charmer has a warm and inviting interior, where locals gather at wooden tables to enjoy excellent gin and tonics, wines by the glass, craft beer and satisfying small plates (anchovies, mussels, tacos, charcuterie). On warm nights, arrive early for one of the terrace tables out the front. Enter via Carrer de l’Avenir.
MARCELBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 209 89 48; Carrer de Santaló 42; h7.30am-1am Mon-Thu, 7.30am-3am Fri & Sat, 9.30am-midnight Sun; dFGC Muntaner)
A classic meeting place, Marcel has a homely, old-world feel, with a wood bar, black-and-white floor tiles and high windows. It offers snacks and tapas as well. Space is somewhat limited and customers inevitably spill out onto the footpath, where there are also a few tables.
BIKINICLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 322 08 00; www.bikinibcn.com; Avinguda Diagonal 547; cover from €12; hmidnight-6am Thu-Sat; g6, 7, 33, 34, 63, 67, L51, L57, jT1, T2, T3 L’Illa)
This old star of the Barcelona nightlife scene has been keeping the beat since 1953. Every possible kind of music gets a run, from Latin and Brazilian beats to 1980s disco, depending on the night and the space you choose.
LIZARRANBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.lizarran.es; Carrer de Can Bruixa 6; h8am-midnight Sun-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat; mLes Corts)
This is a fine pre- or postgame drinking spot if you’re catching an FC Barça match at Camp Nou, 800m to the southwest. The beer and sangría is plentiful and cheap, there’s a decent selection of pintxos (Basque tapas), and on warm days you can sit on the canopied terrace at the front.
SUTTON CLUBCLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %667 432759; www.thesuttonclub.com; Carrer de Tuset 13; cover from €15; h11.30pm-5.30am Wed & Thu, to 6am Fri & Sat; dFGC Gràcia)
With mainstream sounds on the dance floor and some hopping house in a side bar, this neon-lit disco inevitably attracts just about everyone pouring in and out of the nearby bars at some stage of the evening. The main dance floor gets packed with a beautiful crowd and, even with reservations, the bouncers can be tough.
BERLINBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 200 65 42; www.cafeberlinbarcelona.com; Carrer de Muntaner 240; h10am-2am Mon-Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat; mHospital Clínic)
This elegant corner bar offers views over Avinguda Diagonal. There is a cluster of tables outside on the ground floor and designer lounges downstairs. Service can be harried, but the location is excellent for starting an uptown night before kicking on to nearby clubs.
3ENTERTAINMENT

CAMP NOUFOOTBALL
(%902 189900; www.fcbarcelona.com; Carrer d’Arístides Maillol; mPalau Reial)
The massive stadium of Camp Nou (‘New Field’ in Catalan) is home to the legendary Futbol Club Barcelona. Attending a game amid the roar of the crowds is an unforgettable experience; the season runs from September to May. Alternatively, get a taste of all the excitement at the interactive Camp Nou Experience, which includes a tour of the stadium.
LUZ DE GASLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 209 77 11; www.luzdegas.com; Carrer de Muntaner 246; hmidnight-6am Thu-Sat; g6, 7, 27, 32, 33, 34, H8, jT1, T2, T3 Francesc Macià)
Several nights a week this club, set in a grand former theatre, stages concerts ranging through rock, soul, salsa, jazz and pop. Concerts typically kick off around 1am; from about 2am, the place turns into a club that attracts a well-dressed crowd with varying musical tastes, depending on the night. Check the website for the latest schedule.
7 SHOPPING

CATALINA HOUSEHOMEWARES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 140 96 39; www.catalinahouse.net; Carrer d’Amigó 47; h10.30am-2pm & 5-8pm Mon-Fri, 10.30am-2pm Sat; dFGC Muntaner) S
After its decade-long success on the Balearic island of Formentera, Catalina House opened its second shop in Barcelona in 2016. Sustainable materials such as linen, cotton, stone, glass, terracotta and oil-treated recycled timbers are used in stylish Mediterranean designs for the home including cushions, tableware, vases, clocks, sculptures and furniture.
L’ILLA DIAGONALMALL
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 444 00 00; www.lilla.com; Avinguda Diagonal 557; h9.30am-9pm Mon-Sat; mMaria Cristina)
One of Barcelona’s best malls, this is a fine place to while away a few hours (or days), with high-end shops and a mesmerising spread of eateries.
FC BOTIGA MEGASTOREGIFTS & SOUVENIRS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 409 02 71; www.fcbmegastore.com; Gate 9, off Avinguda Joan de XXIII; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat, 10.30am-3.30pm Sun, until kick-off match days; mPalau Reial)
This sprawling three-storey shop at Camp Nou has footballs, shirts, scarves, socks, wallets, bags, footwear, smartphone covers – pretty much anything you can think of – all featuring the team’s famous red-and-blue insignia.
NORMANDIECHILDREN’S CLOTHING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 209 14 11; www.normandiebaby.com; Plaça de Sant Gregori Taumaturg; h10.30am-2.30pm & 4.30-8.30pm Mon-Sat; dFGC La Bonanova)
Set up by Barcelona-born, Paris-trained designer Graziella Antón de Vez in 2000, this fashion label for babies and children up to six years utilises all-natural materials such as angora, cotton, cashmere and wool. Adorable outfits are inspired by France’s Normandy region, with vintage- and retro-style lines.
ORIOL BALAGUERFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 201 18 46; www.oriolbalaguer.com; Plaça de Sant Gregori Taumaturg 2; h9am-2.30pm & 4-9pm Mon-Fri, 8.30am-2.30pm & 4-9pm Sat, 8.30am-2.30pm Sun; dFGC La Bonanova)
Magnificent cakes, sweets, ice cream, chocolates and other sweet creations tantalise in this museumlike shop.
UKKAFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %661 919710; Carrer de Laforja 122; h10.30am-2pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Fri, 11am-2pm & 5.30-8.30pm Sat; dFGC Muntaner)
Ukka makes its bohemian-inspired women’s fashion and accessories (including scarves, hats and some eye-catching jewellery) at its Barcelona factory and sells them exclusively in this chic little terracotta-floored boutique.
LABPERFUMCOSMETICS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 298 95 12; www.labperfum.com; Carrer de Santaló 45; h10am-2.30pm & 5-8.30pm Mon-Sat; dFGC Muntaner)
This tiny shop looks like an old apothecary, with its shelves lined with pretty glass bottles of extraordinary fragrances (for men and women) made in-house and beautifully packaged. Scents diverge from run-of-the-mill Obsession, with varieties like tobacco, black orchid and leather. You can also buy scented candles, soaps and creams.
MERCAT DE GALVANYMARKET
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.mercatgalvany.es; Carrer de Santaló 65; h7am-2.30pm Mon-Thu & Sat, 7am-2.30pm & 7-8pm Fri; dFGC Muntaner)
Opened in 1927, Galvany is one of the city’s most beautiful markets, with a brick facade and glass- and cast-iron interior. Over 80 different stalls sell an enticing variety of bakery items, fresh produce and deli goods.
PASTISSERIA NATCHAFOOD
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 430 10 70; www.natcha.cat; Avinguda de Sarrià 45; h8am-9pm; mHospital Clínic)
Pastisseria Natcha has been tempting barcelonins with chocolates and custom-made cakes since 1958.
2SPORTS & ACTIVITIES

RITUELS D’ORIENTSPA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 419 14 72; www.rituelsdorient.com; Carrer de Loreto 50; baths per 45min €29, treatments from €21; h11am-9pm Tue, Wed & Sun, to 10pm Thu-Sat; mHospital Clínic)
Rituels d’Orient resembles a Moroccan fantasy, with dark woods, window grills, candle lighting and ancient-looking stone walls. It’s a wonderfully relaxing setting for luxuriating in a hammam and indulging in a massage, a body scrub, a facial or hand and foot treatments.





Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni

Neighbourhood Top Five

1 Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya Dedicating a day to the world’s most important collection of early-medieval art in the Romanesque halls, followed by a masterpiece-filled stroll through six centuries of Catalan art.
2 Fundació Joan Miró Viewing brilliant works from one of the giants of the art world, all the more captivating inside the light-filled galleries designed by Josep Lluís Sert.
3 CaixaForum Catching a ground-breaking art exhibition in this Modernista former factory.
4 Museu Etnològic Going eye-to-eye with gegants (giant papier-mâché figures) while learning about the festivals and folklore of Catalonia.
5 Teleférico del Puerto Gazing out over the sea and city on a high-flying cable-car ride between Barceloneta and Montjuïc.
Explore Montjuïc, Poble Sec & Sant Antoni
Montjuïc hosts outstanding art collections alongside several lesser museums, replica Spanish buildings at Poble Espanyol, the sinister Castell de Montjuïc and the beautiful remake of Mies van der Rohe’s 1929 German pavilion. The bulk of the 1992 Olympic installations are also here. Come at night and witness the spectacle of the Font Màgica, several busy theatres and a couple of nightclubs. Throw in various parks and gardens and you have the makings of a very full couple of days.
You can approach the hill from Plaça d’Espanya on foot and take advantage of a series of escalators from the west side of the Palau Nacional up to Avinguda de l’Estadi; alternatively, and spectacularly, you can get onto a cable car and take in the beautiful aerial views of the verdant hill. Otherwise, explore on foot along the numerous forest paths that zigzag through gardens and skirt the various sights.
Sloping down the north face of Montjuïc is the tight warren of working-class El Poble Sec. Though short on sights, it hides some of Barcelona’s most creative bars and eateries. Cross busy Avinguda del Paral·lel to reach Sant Antoni, a formerly humdrum neighbourhood that’s become the epicentre of Barcelona hipsterdom. Vintage-esque cafes, organic eateries and crafty tapas and vermouth joints are in abundance – particularly along Carrer del Parlament.
Local Life
AHang-outs Lined with tapas bars, most with outdoor seating, Carrer de Blai draws a student crowd.
ANightlife Join the dance party at iconic Sala Apolo, catch a concert at BARTS or see an avant-garde performing arts piece at Hiroshima.
AGreenery Stroll through the gardens of Montjuïc (and catch all that art on the way).
Getting There & Away
AMetro Montjuïc’s closest metro stops are Espanya, Poble Sec and Paral·lel.
ABus Bus 150 loops from Plaça d’Espanya to Castell de Montjuïc. Bus 55 runs across town via Plaça de Catalunya past the Museu d’Arqueologia de Catalunya to the Estació Parc Montjuïc funicular station.
AFunicular From the Paral·lel metro station, pick up the funicular (h7.30am-10pm Mon-Fri, 9am-10pm Sat & Sun Apr-Oct, 7.30am-8pm Mon-Fri, 9am-8pm Sat & Sun Nov-Mar) railway, part of the metro fare system, to Estació Parc Montjuïc. It departs every 10 minutes; journey time is two minutes.
ACable car The Teleférico del Puerto goes between Torre de Sant Sebastià in Barceloneta and the Miramar stop on Montjuïc. On Montjuïc (1.3km west of the other cable car), the Telefèric de Montjuïc runs from Estació Parc Montjuïc to the Castell de Montjuïc.
Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
5 Best Places to Eat
AEnigma
AAgust Gastrobar
ATickets
AQuimet i Quimet
AMano Rota
For reviews, see here.
6 Best Places to Drink
AAbirradero
ALa Caseta del Migdia
AEl Rouge
For reviews, see here.
1 Best Art Collections
AMuseu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya (MNAC;)
AFundació Joan Miró
ACaixaForum

TOP SIGHT
FUNDACIÓ JOAN MIRÓ
Joan Miró, the city’s best-known 20th-century artistic progeny, bequeathed this art foundation to his home town in 1971. Its light-filled buildings, designed by close friend and architect Josep Lluís Sert (who also built Miró’s Mallorca studios), are crammed with seminal works, from Miró’s earliest timid sketches to paintings from his last years.

DON’T MISS

ASert’s architectural design
AMasterworks in Rooms 18 and 19
AMiro’s move to surrealism, Room 17
AThe sculpture garden
PRACTICALITIES

AMAP GOOGLE MAP, E4
A%93 443 94 70
Awww.fmirobcn.org
AParc de Montjuïc
Aadult/child €12/free
Ah10am-8pm Tue, Wed, Fri & Sat, to 9pm Thu, to 3pm Sun
Ag55, 150, jParal·lel
Sert’s Temple to Miró’s Art
Sert’s shimmering white temple to one of Spain’s artistic luminaries is considered one of the world’s most outstanding museum buildings. The architect designed it after spending many of Franco’s dictatorship years in the USA as the head of the School of Design at Harvard University. The foundation rests amid the greenery of the mountains and holds the greatest single collection of the artist’s work, containing around 220 of his paintings, 180 sculptures, some textiles and more than 8000 drawings spanning his entire life. Only a small portion is ever on display.
The Collection
The exhibits give a broad impression of Miró’s artistic development. The first couple of rooms (11 and 12) hold various works, including a giant tapestry in his trademark primary colours. Along the way, you’ll pass Mercury Fountain by Alexander Calder, a rebuilt work that was originally created for the 1937 Paris Fair and represented Spain at the Spanish Republic’s Pavilion. Room 13, a basement space called Espai 13, leads you downstairs to a small room for temporary exhibitions.
After visiting Room 13, climb back up the stairs and descend to two other basement rooms (14 and 15). Together labelled Homenatge a Joan Miró (Homage to Joan Miró), this space is dedicated to photos of the artist, a 15-minute video on his life and a series of works from some of his contemporaries, like Henry Moore, Antoni Tàpies, Eduardo Chillida, Yves Tanguy, Fernand Léger and others.
Returning to the main level, you’ll find Room 16, the Sala Joan Prats, with works spanning the early years until 1919. Here you can see how the young Miró moved away, under surrealist influence, from his relative realism (for instance his 1917 painting Ermita de Sant Joan d’Horta, with obvious Fauvist influences) towards his own unique style that uses primary colours and morphed shapes symbolising the moon, the female form and birds.
This theme is continued upstairs in Room 17, the Sala Pilar Juncosa (named after his wife), which covers the years 1932–55, his surrealist years. Rooms 18 and 19 contain masterworks of the years 1956–83, and Room 20 a series of paintings done on paper. Room 21 hosts a selection of the private Katsuta collection of Miró works from 1914 to 1974. Room 22 rounds off the permanent exhibition with some major paintings and bronzes from the 1960s and 1970s.
The museum library contains Miró’s personal book collection.
The Garden
Outside on the eastern flank of the museum is the Jardí de les Escultures, a small garden with various pieces of modern sculpture. The green areas surrounding the museum, together with the garden, are perfect for a picnic in the shade, after a hard day’s sightseeing.

TOP SIGHT
MUSEU NACIONAL D’ART DE CATALUNYA
From across the city, the flamboyant neobaroque silhouette of the Mirador del Palau Nacional can be seen on the slopes of Montjuïc. Built for the 1929 World Exhibition and restored in 2005, it houses a vast collection of mostly Catalan art spanning the early Middle Ages to the early 20th century. The highlight is the collection of extraordinary Romanesque frescoes.


ANDY.CALEY/SHUTTERSTOCK ©
DON’T MISS

ARomanesque pieces
AGothic artworks
AThe paintings of the Cambò Bequest and Thyssen-Bornemisza collections
A1930s Spanish Civil War posters
PRACTICALITIES

AMNAC
AMAP GOOGLE MAP, D4
A%93 622 03 76
Awww.museunacional.cat
AMirador del Palau Nacional
Aadult/child €12/free, after 3pm Sat & 1st Sun of month free, rooftop viewpoint only €2
Ah10am-8pm Tue-Sat, to 3pm Sun May-Sep, to 6pm Tue-Sat Oct-Apr
Ag55, mEspanya
Romanesque Masterpieces
The Romanesque art section is considered the most important concentration of early medieval art in the world. Rescued from neglected country churches across northern Catalonia in the early 20th century, the collection consists of 21 frescoes, woodcarvings and painted altar frontals (low-relief wooden panels that were the forerunners of the elaborate altarpieces that adorned later churches). The insides of several churches have been recreated and the frescoes – in some cases fragmentary, in others extraordinarily complete and alive with colour – have been placed as they were when in situ.
The first of the two most striking frescoes, in Sala 7, is a magnificent image of Christ in Majesty done around 1123. Based on the text of the Apocalypse, we see Christ enthroned with the world at his feet. He holds a book open with the words Ego Sum Lux Mundi (I am the Light of the World) and is surrounded by the four Evangelists. The images were taken from the apse of the Església de Sant Climent de Taüll in northwest Catalonia. Nearby in Sala 9 are frescoes done around the same time in the nearby Església de Santa Maria de Taüll. This time the central image taken from the apse is of the Virgin Mary and Christ Child. These images were not mere decoration but tools of instruction in the basics of Christian faith for the local population – try to set yourself in the mind of the average medieval citizen: illiterate, ignorant, fearful and in most cases eking out a subsistence living. These images transmitted the basic personalities and tenets of the faith and were accepted at face value by most.
The Gothic Collection
Opposite the Romanesque collection on the ground floor is the museum’s Gothic art section. In these halls you can see Catalan Gothic painting and works from other Spanish and Mediterranean regions. Look out especially for the work of Bernat Martorell in Sala 25 and Jaume Huguet in Sala 26. Among Martorell’s works figure images of the martyrdom of St Vincent and St Llúcia. Huguet’s Consagració de Sant Agustí, in which St Augustine is depicted as a bishop, is dazzling in its detail.
The Cambò Bequest & the Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection
As the Gothic collection draws to a close, you pass through two separate and equally eclectic private collections. The Cambò Bequest by Francesc Cambó spans the history of European painting between the 14th century and the beginning of the 19th century, and the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection presents a selection of European painting and sculpture produced between the 13th and the 18th centuries on loan to the MNAC by the Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza in Madrid. The Thyssen-Bornemisza collection’s highlight is Fra Angelico’s Madonna of Humility, whereas the Cambò Bequest holds wonderful works by masters Veronese, Titian and Canaletto, particularly. Cranach, Titian, El Greco, Rubens and even Gainsborough also feature, but the collection’s finale is examples of work by Francisco de Goya.
Modern Catalan Art
Up on the next floor, the collection turns to modern art, mainly but not exclusively Catalan. This collection is arranged thematically: Modernisme, Noucentisme, Art and the Civil War and so on. Among the many highlights: an early Salvador Dalí painting (Portrait of My Father), Juan Gris’ collage-like paintings, the brilliant portraits of Marià Fortuny, and 1930s call-to-arms posters against the Francoist onslaught (nearby you’ll find photos of soldiers and bombed-out city centres). There are works by Modernista painters Ramon Casas and Santiago Rusiñol, as well as Catalan luminary Antoni Tàpies.
Also on show are items of Modernista furniture and decoration, which include a mural by Ramon Casas (the artist and Pere Romeu on a tandem bicycle) that once adorned the legendary bar and restaurant Els Quatre Gats.
THE FRESCO STRIPPERS

The Stefanoni brothers, Italian art restorers, brought the secrets of strappo (stripping of frescoes from walls) to Catalonia in the early 1900s. The Stefanoni would cover frescoes with a sheet of fabric, stuck on with a glue made of cartilage. When dry, this allowed the image to be stripped off the wall and rolled up. For three years the Stefanoni roamed the Pyrenean countryside, stripping churches and sending the rolls back to Barcelona, where they were eventually put back up on walls to reflect how they had originally appeared.
TOP TIPS

AAn audioguide costs €4.
ABe sure to take in the fine view from the terrace just in front of the museum. It draws crowds around sunset.
AAnother fine viewpoint is on the museum’s roof terrace (included in admission or €2 if you only want to visit the rooftop).
1SIGHTS

MUSEU NACIONAL D’ART DE CATALUNYAMUSEUM
See here.
FUNDACIÓ JOAN MIRÓMUSEUM
See here.
CAIXAFORUMGALLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 476 86 00; www.caixaforum.es; Avinguda de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 6-8; adult/child €4/free, 1st Sun of month free; h10am-8pm; mEspanya)
The Caixa building society prides itself on its involvement in (and ownership of) art, in particular all that is contemporary. Its premier art expo space in Barcelona hosts part of the bank’s extensive collection from around the globe. The setting is a completely renovated former factory, the Fàbrica Casaramona, an outstanding Modernista brick structure designed by Puig i Cadafalch. From 1940 to 1993 it housed the First Squadron of the police cavalry unit – 120 horses in all.
On occasion, portions of La Caixa’s own collection of 800 works of modern and contemporary art go on display, but more often than not major international exhibitions are the key draw.
In the courtyard where the police horses used to drink is a steel tree designed by the Japanese architect Arata Isozaki. Musical recitals are sometimes held in the museum, especially in the warmer months.
FONT MÀGICAFOUNTAIN
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 316 10 00; Avinguda de la Reina Maria Cristina; hevery 30min 7.30-10.30pm Wed-Sun Jun-Sep, 9-10pm Thu-Sat Apr, May & Oct, 8-9pm Thu-Sat Nov-early Jan & mid-Feb–Mar; mEspanya) F
A huge fountain that crowns the long sweep of the Avinguda de la Reina Maria Cristina to the grand facade of the Palau Nacional, Font Màgica is a unique performance in which the water can look like seething fireworks or a mystical cauldron of colour.
Originally created for the 1929 World Exposition, it has again been a magnet since the 1992 Olympics. With a flourish, the ‘Magic Fountain’ erupts into a feast of musical, backlit aquatic life. On hot summer evenings especially, this 15-minute spectacle (repeated several times throughout the evening) mesmerises onlookers. On the last evening of the Festes de la Mercè in September, a particularly spectacular display includes fireworks. Eco initiatives include the use of groundwater and LED lights.
JARDÍ BOTÀNICGARDENS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.museuciencies.cat; Carrer del Doctor Font i Quer 2; adult/child €3.50/free, after 3pm Sun & 1st Sun of month free; h10am-7pm Apr-Sep, to 5pm Oct-Mar; g55, 150)
This botanical garden is dedicated to Mediterranean flora and has a collection of some 40,000 plants and 1500 species, including many that thrive in areas with a climate similar to that of the Mediterranean, such as the Canary Islands, North Africa, Australia, California, Chile and South Africa.
CASTELL DE MONTJUÏCFORTRESS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 44 45; http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/castelldemontjuic; Carretera de Montjuïc 66; adult/child €5/3, after 3pm Sun & 1st Sun of month free; h10am-8pm Apr-Oct, to 6pm Nov-Mar; g150, jTelefèric de Montjuïc, Castell de Montjuïc)
This forbidding castell (castle or fort) dominates the southeastern heights of Montjuïc and enjoys commanding views over the Mediterranean. It dates, in its present form, from the late 17th and 18th centuries. For most of its dark history, it has been used to watch over the city and as a political prison and killing ground.
Anarchists were executed here around the end of the 19th century, fascists during the civil war and Republicans after it – most notoriously Lluís Companys in 1940. The castle is surrounded by a network of ditches and walls (from which its strategic position over the city and port becomes clear).
An exhibition space in several of the rooms of the castle explains the history of the place, with archaeological finds from prehistoric days to its role as medieval beacon and its later days as a strategic bastion. Most interesting (and disturbing) is the exhibition devoted to the imprisonments, trials and executions that happened here. Don’t miss the tombstones (some dating from the 11th century) from the one-time Jewish cemetery on Montjuïc.
The views from the castle and the surrounding area looking over the sea, port and city below are the best part of making the trip here. Around the seaward foot of the castle is an airy walking track, the Camí del Mar, which offers breezy views of the city and sea.
From the Jardins del Mirador MAP GOOGLE MAP; (http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/ecologiaurbana; Carretera de Montjuïc; h10am-sunset; jTelefèric de Montjuïc, Mirador) F, opposite the Mirador (Telefèric) station, you have fine views over the port of Barcelona. A little further downhill, the Jardins de Joan Brossa MAP GOOGLE MAP; (Plaça de la Sardana; h10am-sunset) F are charming, landscaped gardens on the site of a former amusement park near Plaça de la Sardana MAP GOOGLE MAP; (g150). These gardens contain many Mediterranean species, from cypresses to pines and a few palms. There are swings and things, thematic walking trails and some good city views.
WORTH A DETOUR
COLÒNIA GÜELL

Apart from La Sagrada Família, Gaudí’s last big project was the creation of a utopian textile workers’ complex for his magnate patron Eusebi Güell outside Barcelona at Santa Coloma de Cervelló. Gaudí’s main role was to erect the colony’s church, Colònia Güell (%93 630 58 07; www.gaudicoloniaguell.org; Carrer Claudi Güell; adult/concession €7/5.50; h10am-7pm Mon-Fri, to 3pm Sat & Sun May-Oct, 10am-5pm Mon-Fri, to 3pm Sat & Sun Nov-Apr; dFGC lines S4, S8, S33 to Colònia Güell). Work began in 1908, but the idea fizzled out eight years later and Gaudí only finished the crypt, which still serves as a working church.
This structure is a key to understanding what the master had in mind for his magnum opus, La Sagrada Família. The mostly brick-clad columns that support the ribbed vaults in the ceiling are inclined at all angles in much the way you might expect trees in a forest to lean. That effect was deliberate, but also grounded in physics. Gaudí worked out the angles so that their load would be transmitted from the ceiling to the earth without the help of extra buttressing. Similar thinking lay behind his plans for La Sagrada Família, whose Gothic-inspired structure would tower above any medieval building, without requiring a single buttress. Gaudí’s hand is visible down to the wavy design of the pews. The primary colours in the curvaceous plant-shaped stained-glass windows are another reminder of the era in which the crypt was built.
Near the church spread the cute brick houses designed for the factory workers, which are still inhabited today. A short stroll away, the 23 factory buildings of a Modernista industrial complex, idle since the 1970s, were brought back to life in the early 2000s, with shops and businesses moving into the renovated complex.
In a five-room display with audiovisual and interactive material, the history and life of the industrial colony and the story of Gaudí’s church are told in colourful fashion.
POBLE ESPANYOLCULTURAL CENTRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.poble-espanyol.com; Avinguda de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 13; adult/child €14/7; h9am-8pm Mon, to midnight Tue-Thu & Sun, to 3am Fri, to 4am Sat; g13, 23, 150, mEspanya)
Welcome to Spain! All of it! This ‘Spanish Village’ is an intriguing scrapbook of Spanish architecture built for the Spanish crafts section of the 1929 World Exhibition. You can meander from Andalucía to the Balearic Islands in the space of a couple of hours, visiting surprisingly good copies of Spain’s characteristic structures. The 117 buildings include 17 restaurants, cafes and bars, and 20 craft shops and workshops (for glass artists and other artisans), as well as souvenir stores.
You enter from beneath a towered medieval gate from Ávila. Inside, to the right, is an information office with free maps and a worthwhile multimedia guide (€3.50; leave a €20 deposit). Straight ahead from the gate is the Plaza Mayor (Town Sq), surrounded with mainly Castilian and Aragonese buildings. It is sometimes the scene of summer concerts. Elsewhere you’ll find an Andalucian barrio (district), a Basque street, Galician and Catalan quarters, and even a Dominican monastery (at the eastern end).
Spare some time for the Fundació Fran Daurel MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 423 41 72; www.fundaciofrandaurel.com; incl in Poble Espanyol admission; h11am-8pm Jun-Sep, 10am-6.30pm Mon, 10am-7pm Tue-Sun Oct-May), an eclectic collection of 300 works of art, including sculptures, prints, ceramics and tapestries by modern artists ranging from Picasso and Miró to more contemporary figures, such as Miquel Barceló.
Children’s groups can participate in the Joc del Sarró. Accompanied by adults, the kids go around the poble seeking the answers to various mysteries outlined in a kit distributed to each group. Languages catered for include English.
MUSEU D’ARQUEOLOGIA DE CATALUNYAMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; MAC; %93 423 21 49; www.mac.cat; Passeig de Santa Madrona 39-41; adult/child €5.50/free; h9.30am-7pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2.30pm Sun; g55, mPoble Sec)
This archaeology museum, housed in what was the Graphic Arts Palace during the 1929 World Exhibition, covers Catalonia and cultures from elsewhere in Spain. Items range from copies of pre-Neanderthal skulls to lovely Carthaginian necklaces and jewel-studded Visigothic crosses.
There’s good material on the Balearic Islands (Rooms X to XIII) and Empúries (Emporion, the Greek and Roman city on the Costa Brava; Rooms XIV and XVII). The Roman finds upstairs were mostly dug up in and around Barcelona. The most beautiful piece is a mosaic depicting Les Tres Gràcies (The Three Graces), unearthed near Plaça de Sant Jaume in the 18th century. Another is of Bellerophon and the Chimera. In the final room, dedicated to the dying centuries of the Roman world, a beautiful golden disc depicting Medusa stands out.
MUSEU ETNOLÒGICMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 424 68 07; http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/museuetnologic; Passeig de Santa Madrona 16-22; adult/child €5/free, 4-8pm Sun & 1st Sun of month free; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat, to 8pm Sun; g55)
Barcelona’s ethnology museum presents an intriguing permanent collection that delves into the rich heritage of Catalonia. Exhibits cover origin myths, religious festivals, folklore, and the blending of the sacred and the secular (along those lines, don’t miss the Nativity scene with that quirky Catalan character el caganer, aka ‘the crapper’).
The collection also has instruments and archive images of traditional dances from the Catalan Pyrenees, plus accoutrements of bygone days showcasing the region’s blacksmiths, winemakers, weavers, apothecaries, shepherds, potters, toymakers and even saurí (‘diviners’; those tasked with finding water and hidden things). There are also several gegants (massive figures made of papier-mâché) depicting King Jaume I and Queen Violant. You can also check out a dragon (though you’ll have to imagine the spewing burning embers it emits) and devil costumes used in correfocs (fire runs), which still figure prominently in Catalan festivals.
L’ANELLA OLÍMPICA & ESTADI OLÍMPICAREA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.estadiolimpic.cat; Avinguda de l’Estadi; g13, 150) F L’Anella Olímpica (Olympic Ring) is the group of installations built for the main events of the 1992 Olympics. They include the PISCINES BERNAT PICORNELL, where the swimming and diving events were held, and the ESTADI OLÍMPIC (MAP; %93 426 20 89; Passeig Olímpic 15-17; h8am-8pm May-Sep, 10am-6pm Oct-Apr)
F, which is open to the public when it’s not in use for sporting events or concerts.
PARC DE JOAN MIRÓPARK
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer de Tarragona; h10am-sunset; mTarragona) F
This palm-filled park is worth a look for its massive Miró sculpture, Dona i Ocell, which towers above the surrounding concrete. Locals know the park as the Parc de l’Escorxador (Abattoir Park), after the slaughterhouse that once stood here – unsurprisingly given the proximity to the former Les Arenes bullring (now a shopping centre).
JARDINS DE MOSSÈN CINTO DE VERDAGUERGARDENS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/ecologiaurbana; Avinguda Miramar 30; h10am-sunset; g55, 150) F
Near the Estació Parc Montjuïc funicular/Telefèric station are the ornamental Jardins de Mossèn Cinto de Verdaguer. These sloping, verdant gardens are home to various kinds of bulbs and aquatic plants. Many of the former (some 80,000) have to be replanted each year. They include tulips, narcissus, crocus, varieties of dahlia and more. The aquatic plants include lotus and water lilies.
CEMENTIRI DEL SUD-OESTCEMETERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Cementiri Nou; %93 484 19 99; www.cbsa.cat; Carrer de la Mare de Déu de Port 56-58; h8am-6pm; g21, 107) F
On the hill to the south of the Anella Olímpica, this huge 1883-opened cemetery stretches down the southern slopes, combining elaborate architect-designed tombs for rich families and small niches for the rest. It includes the graves of numerous Catalan artists and politicians, and, at the southern entrance, the Col·lecció de Carrosses Fúnebres hearse collection. On Sundays and public holidays only, bus 107 goes right through the cemetery. From Monday to Saturday, take bus 21 to the main gates.
MUSEU OLÍMPIC I DE L’ESPORTMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 292 53 79; www.museuolimpicbcn.cat; Avinguda de l’Estadi 60; adult/child €5.80/free; h10am-8pm Tue-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun Apr-Sep, 10am-6pm Tue-Sat, to 2.30pm Sun Oct-Mar; g55, 150)
The Museu Olímpic i de l’Esport is an information-packed interactive sporting museum. After picking up tickets, you wander down a ramp that snakes below ground level and is lined with multimedia displays on the history of sport and the Olympic Games, starting with the ancients.
PAVELLÓ MIES VAN DER ROHEARCHITECTURE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 215 10 11; www.miesbcn.com; Avinguda de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 7; adult/child €5/free; h10am-8pm Mar-Oct, 10am-6pm Nov-Feb; mEspanya)
The Pavelló Mies van der Rohe is a work of artful simplicity that is emblematic of the Modernisme movement. The structure has been the subject of many studies and interpretations, and it has inspired several generations of architects. That said, unless you’re an avid architecture fan, there isn’t much to see inside beyond what you can glean from the building’s exterior.

COL·LECCIÓ DE CARROSSES FÚNEBRESMUSEUM
(%93 484 19 99; www.cbsa.cat; Carrer de la Mare de Déu de Port 56-58; h10am-2pm Sat & Sun; g21, 107) F
If late-18th-century to mid-20th-century hearses capture your imagination, then this collection at the Cementiri del Sud-Oest is probably the city’s weirdest sight, a place to contemplate the pomp and circumstance of people’s last earthly ride. The funeral company claims it is the biggest museum of its kind in the world.
PARC DE L’ESPANYA INDUSTRIALPARK
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer de Muntadas 37; h10am-sunset; mSants Estació) F
With ponds, little waterfalls, green spaces, trees, a dragon-shaped children’s slide, bar, and towers that look like sci-fi prison-camp searchlight towers, this park is playfully postmodern. It’s transformed when illuminated at night and worth a look if you’re waiting for a train at Barcelona Sants.
JARDINS DE MOSSÈN COSTA I LLOBERAGARDENS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/ecologiaurbana; Carretera de Miramar 38; h10am-sunset; jTransbordador Aeri, Miramar) F
Above the thundering traffic of the main road to Tarragona, the Jardins de Mossèn Costa i Llobera have a good collection of tropical and desert plants – including a veritable forest of cacti (Europe’s largest collection), with some species reaching over 5m in height.
MAR I MUNTANYA (SEA & MOUNTAIN)

The quickest way from the beach to the mountain is via the cable car (MAP; %93 430 47 16; www.telefericodebarcelona.com; Avinguda de Miramar; one way/return €11/16.50; h10.30am-8pm Jun–mid-Sep, 10.30am-7pm Mar-May & mid-Sep–Oct, 11am-5.30pm Nov-Feb; g150) that runs between Torre de Sant Sebastiá in Barceloneta and the Miramar stop on Montjuïc. From Estació Parc Montjuïc, the separate Telefèric de Montjuïc (MAP; %93 328 90 03; www.telefericdemontjuic.cat; Avinguda de Miramar 30; adult/child one way €8.20/6.50; h10am-9pm Jun-Sep, 10am-7pm Mar-May & Oct, 10am-6pm Nov-Feb; g55, 150) cable car carries you to the Castell de Montjuïc via the mirador (lookout point).
5EATING

FEDERALCAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 187 36 07; www.federalcafe.es; Carrer del Parlament 39; mains €9-12; h8am-11pm Mon-Thu, 8am-1am Fri, 9am-1am Sat, 9am-5.30pm Sun; Wv; mSant Antoni)
On a stretch that now teems with cafes, Australian-run Federal was the trailbazer, with its good coffee (including a decent flat white) and superb brunches. Later in the day, healthy, tasty options span snacks (prawn toast, polenta chips with gorgonzola) to larger dishes like veggie burgers or grilled salmon with soba noodles. Head to the small, breezy roof terrace.
ESCRIBÀPASTRIES€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 454 75 35; www.escriba.es; Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes 546; pastries €2-6.50; h8.30am-8.30pm; mUrgell)
Antoni Escribà carries forward a family tradition (since 1906) of melting barcelonins’ hearts with remarkable pastries and chocolate creations. Seasonal treats include the Easter bunyols de xocolata (little round pastry balls filled with chocolate cream). Escribà has another branch in a Modernista setting at La Rambla.
HORCHATERIA SIRVENTICE CREAM€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 441 27 20; www.turronessirvent.com; Carrer del Parlament 56; ice cream €1.60-3, horchata €2.20-3.90; h9am-10pm; mSant Antoni)
Along with ice cream, granissat (iced fruit crush) and turrón (nougat), this old-school parlour has served barcelonins’ favourite source of orxata/horchata (tiger-nut drink) since 1926 – the best you’ll try without having to catch the train down to this drink’s spiritual home, Valencia. You can get it by the glass or take it away.
SPICECAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 624 33 59; www.spicecafe.es; Carrer de Margarit 13; dishes €3.50-5; h4-9pm Tue-Thu, 11am-9pm Fri-Sun; W; mPoble Sec)
Run by friendly English-speaking staff, Spice is a delightful cafe that’s earned a following for its delicious homemade desserts, such as ricotta and cinnamon cheesecake or a gluten-free orange and cardamom loaf. Along with excellent coffees, there are loose-leaf teas and homemade sodas.
JUICE HOUSEHEALTH FOOD€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 117 15 15; www.thejuicehouse.es; Carrer del Parlament 12; dishes €5.50-11.50; h11am-4pm & 7-11pm Mon, Tue & Thu, 11am-4pm Wed, 10am-5pm & 7pm-midnight Fri & Sat, 10am-5pm Sun; v; mPoble Sec)
Whether you’re a vegetarian, vegan, flexitarian, raw food fan or simply after a tasty, thoughtfully prepared meal, this cheery cafe should figure high on your itinerary. Oat and chia pancakes, açaí fruit bowls, and oven-baked eggs are fine ways to start the morning.
oQUIMET I QUIMETTAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 442 31 42; Carrer del Poeta Cabanyes 25; tapas €4-10, montaditos €2.80-4; hnoon-4pm & 7-10.30pm Mon-Fri, noon-4pm Sat, closed Aug; mParal·lel)
Quimet i Quimet is a family-run business that has been passed down from generation to generation. There’s barely space to swing a calamar (squid) in this bottle-lined, standing-room-only place, but it is a treat for the palate, with montaditos (tapas on a slice of bread) made to order.
oAGUST GASTROBARBISTRO€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 162 67 33; www.agustbarcelona.com; Carrer del Parlament 54; mains €12.50-24; hkitchen 7pm-midnight Mon-Thu, 2pm-midnight Fri-Sun, bar to 2am; mPoble Sec)
Set up by two French chefs (one of whom trained under Gordon Ramsay), Agust occupies a fabulous mezzanine space with timber beams, exposed brick and textured metro tiles. Baby scallops with seaweed butter and prawn-stuffed avocado cannelloni are savoury standouts; desserts include the extraordinary ‘el cactus’ (chocolate-crumble soil, mojito mousse and prickly pear sorbet) served in a terracotta flower pot.
MANO ROTABISTRO€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 164 80 41; www.manorota.com; Carrer de la Creu dels Molers 4; mains €15-22; h8-11.30pm Mon, 1-3.30pm & 8-11.30pm Tue-Sat, 1-3.30pm Sun; mPoble Sec)
Exposed brick, aluminium pipes, industrial light fittings and recycled timbers create a hip, contemporary setting for inspired bistro cooking at Mano Rota (which literally translates as ‘broken hand’, but is actually a Spanish idiom for consummate skill). Asian, South American and Mediterranean flavours combine in dishes such as crispy squid with yuzu aioli or dorade (bream) with pak choy pesto.
LASCAR 74PERUVIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 017 98 72; www.lascar.es; Carrer del Roser 74; mains €12-15; h7-11.30pm Mon-Thu, 2-5pm & 7pm-11.30pm Fri-Sun; mParal·lel)
At this self-styled ‘ceviche and pisco bar’, oyster shooters with leche de tigre (the traditional ceviche marinade) are served alongside exquisite Peruvian ceviches as well as renditions from Thailand, Japan and Mexico. Pisco sours are the real deal, frothy egg white and all.
PALO CORTAOTAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 188 90 67; www.palocortao.es; Carrer de Nou de la Rambla 146; mains €10-15; h8pm-1am Tue-Fri, 1-5pm & 8pm-1am Sat & Sun; mParal·lel)
Contemporary Palo Cortao is renowned for its beautifully executed seafood and meat dishes, served at fair prices. Highlights include roast oxtail with vermouth jus, octopus with white bean hummus, smoked mackerel with pickled jalapeño and tuna tataki tempura. Its long wooden bar with metal stools is ideal for solo diners.
CASA XICAFUSION€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 600 58 58; Carrer de la França Xica 20; sharing plates €5-15; h8.30-11pm Mon, 1.30-11pm Tue-Sat; mPoble Sec)
On the parlour floor of an old house, Casa Xica is a casual but artfully designed space where elements of the Far East are fused with fresh Catalan ingredients (owners Marc and Raquel lived and travelled in Asia).
CASA DE TAPAS CAÑOTATAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 325 91 71; www.casadetapas.com; Carrer de Lleida 7; tapas €5-14; h1-4pm & 7.30pm-midnight Tue-Sat, 1-4pm Sun; mPoble Sec)
Between Poble Sec and Plaça d’Espanya, this friendly, unfussy option serves affordable, nicely turned out tapas plates. Seafood is the speciality, with rich razor clams, garlic-fried prawns and tender octopus. Wash it down with a refreshing bottle of albariño (a Galician white).
XEMEIITALIAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 553 51 40; www.xemei.es; Passeig de l’Exposició 85; mains €16-26; h1.30-3.30pm & 9-11pm Mon-Fri, 2-4.30pm & 9pm-midnight Sat & Sun; mPoble Sec)
Xemei (‘Twins’ in Venetian, for its twin Venetian owners) is a wonderful slice of Venice in Barcelona. To the accompaniment of gentle jazz, you might try a starter of burrata with crispy leeks and potato rosti, followed by bigoi in salsa veneziana (thick spaghetti in an anchovy and onion sauce) or pasta alla seppia nera polpo (squid-ink pasta with octopus).
BODEGA SEPÚLVEDACATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 323 59 44; www.bodegasepulveda.net; Carrer de Sepúlveda 173; mains €11-21; h1.30-4.30pm & 8pm-1am Mon-Fri, 8pm-1am Sat; mUniversitat)
This venerable tavern has been in business since 1952. The dizzying range of dishes mixes traditional (Catalan faves like cap i pota – stew made with bits of the calf you don’t want to think about) with more surprising options like carpaccio de calabacín con bacalao y parmesán (thin courgette slices draped in cod and Parmesan).
MALAMÉNCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 252 77 63; www.malamen.es; Carrer de Blai 53; mains €12-24; h8pm-midnight Tue-Sun; mPoble Sec)
Carrer de Blai is lined with bars and restaurants, but Malamén towers above most for its elegant art-deco-inspired design, immaculate service and gourmet versions of Catalan classics. Its shortish menu offers confit tuna, dill and caper salad, juicy steak with creamed mushrooms and blue-cheese croquettes, and the wine list is equally concise.
BODEGA 1900TAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 325 26 59; www.bodega1900.com; Carrer de Tamarit 91; tapas €6-15; h1pm-10.30pm Tue-Sat, closed Aug; mPoble Sec)
Bodega 1900 mimics an old-school tapas and vermouth bar, but don’t be fooled: this venture from the world-famous Adrià brothers creates gastronomic tapas such as ‘spherified’ reconstructed olives, or its mollete de calamars, probably the best squid sandwich in the world, hot from the pan and served with chipotle mayonnaise, kimchi and lemon zest.
BAR RAMÓNTAPAS€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 325 02 83; http://barramon.dudaone.com; Carrer del Comte Borrell 81; tapas €5-12; h8.30-11.30pm Mon-Thu, 9am-4pm & 8.30pm-midnight Fri & Sat; mSant Antoni)
A much-loved local haunt in Sant Antoni, Bar Ramón is a lively blues-filled joint near the market. Old photos of American musical R&B legends (and a few guitars) line the walls – a fine backdrop for tapas like tender slices of jamón ibérico, grilled prawns and house-speciality jabuguitos (chorizo cooked in cider). It fills up fast, so reserve ahead.
FÀBRICA MORITZGASTROPUB€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 426 00 50; www.moritz.com; Ronda de Sant Antoni 41; sandwiches €6.50-11, mains €8-19.50; h9am-3am; mSant Antoni)
In a building redesigned by architect Jean Nouvel, with a menu created by chef Jordi Vilà of Michelin-starred Alkímia (also on the premises), this restaurant at the Moritz brewery offers pan-European gastropub fare such as gourmet sandwiches, moules-frites (mussels and fries), steak tartare, whole roast chicken, fish and chips, frankfurters with sauerkraut and flammkuchen (Alsatian-style pizza).
PIZZA DEL SORTIDORPIZZA€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 173 04 90; www.lapizzadelsortidor.com; Carrer de Blasco de Garay 46; pizza €7-13; h7.30pm-midnight Mon-Fri, 1.30-4pm & 7.30pm-midnight Sat & Sun; Wv; mPoble Sec)
Dive into this rock-loving pizzeria for delicious thin-crust pizza, served piping hot from the wood-burning oven. It’s utterly pretension-free – served without utensils or even plates (cardboard is used instead). Cheap beer is served in plastic cups, but you won’t leave dissatisfied, especially after the complimentary shot of limoncello at the meal’s end. Cash only.
BASÍLICOMEDITERRANEAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 423 73 76; www.grupandiliana.com; Avinguda del Paral·lel 142; mains €10-17; h1-3.30pm & 8.30-11.30pm; Wc; mPoble Sec)
Shelves filled with wine bottles line the walls of this cavernous space, which turns out contemporary Mediterranean cuisine (Iberian pork cheeks with mango salsa; salt-baked lamb with crushed potatoes and fig jus; confit octopus with deep-fried softshell crab). Two-course lunch menus (€11.15) and four- and five-course dinner menus (€25/30) are fantastic value.
LA FONT DEL GATMEDITERRANEAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 289 04 04; www.lafontdelgat.com; Passeig de Santa Madrona 28; 3-course menu €16; h10am-6pm Tue-Fri, noon-6pm Sat & Sun; g55)
Set on the edge of the Jardins de Laribal, La Font del Gat’s lovely, spacious terrace is dotted with orange trees and surrounded by greenery. It has a daily changing menu (no à la carte); dishes might include cinnamon- and lemon-marinated chicken or grilled tuna with caper butter. There’s always a vegetarian option such as vegetable and goat cheese risotto.
LA BELLA NAPOLIPIZZA€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 442 50 56; www.labellanapoli.es; Carrer de Margarit 14; pizza €10-16, mains €12-24; h1.30-4pm & 8.30pm-midnight; mParal·lel)
Pizzas here, ranging from the simple margherita to the more complex tartufo nero with gorgonzola and black truffles, are made the way they make them in Naples. The waiters are mostly from across the Med and have a cheeky southern Italian approach to food, customers and everything else.
TAVERNA CAN MARGARITCATALAN€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 441 67 23; Carrer de la Concòrdia 21; mains €10-15; h8.30pm-midnight Mon-Sat; mPoble Sec)
For decades this former wine store has been dishing out dinner to often raucous groups. Traditional Catalan cooking is the name of the game. Surrounded by aged wine barrels, take your place at old tables and benches and perhaps order the conejo a la jumillana (fried rabbit served with garlic, onion, bay leaves, rosemary, mint, thyme and oregano).
oENIGMAGASTRONOMY€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %616 696322; www.enigmaconcept.es; Carrer de Sepúlveda 38-40; tasting menu €220; h1-4pm & 4.30-10.30pm Tue-Fri, noon-5.30pm & 6-10.30pm Sat; mEspanya)
Resembling a 3D art installation, this conceptual offering from the famed Adrià brothers is a 40-course tour de force of cutting-edge gastronomy across six different dining spaces. A meal takes 3½ hours all up and includes customised cocktail pairings (you can order additional drinks). There’s a minimum of two diners; reserve months in advance. A €100 deposit is required upon booking.
Once your booking’s confirmed, you’ll receive the door code by email. Note that it’s not suitable for kids, vegetarians or anyone with dietary restrictions. Diners are instructed not to post images on social media to preserve the enigmatic experience.
oTICKETSTAPAS, GASTRONOMY€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 292 42 50; www.ticketsbar.es; Avinguda del Paral·lel 164; tapas €3-26; h7-11.30pm Tue-Fri, 1-3.30pm & 7-11.30pm Sat, closed Aug; mParal·lel)
A flamboyant affair playing with circus images and theatre lights, this is one of the sizzling tickets in the restaurant world, a Michelin-starred tapas bar opened by Ferran Adrià, of the legendary (since closed) El Bulli, and his brother Albert. Bookings are only taken online two months in advance, but you can try calling for last-minute cancellations.
The food veers towards the deliciously surreal in concoctions like crispy octopus with kimichi mayo or sage-marinated prawns with frozen salt, followed by sweet-potato sorbet with liquorice and tangerine sponge. The seafood bar serves a variety of oysters, with caviar, borscht and other unusual toppings.
ALKÍMIACATALAN€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 207 61 15; www.alkimia.cat; Ronda de Sant Antoni 41; mains €22-42; h1.30-3.30pm & 8-10.30pm Mon-Fri; mUniversitat)
Inside the Fàbrica Moritz brewery, culinary alchemist Jordi Vilà creates refined Catalan dishes with a twist (oyster-stuffed courgette flowers; roast royal hare with beetroot; candied lemon soufflé with pickled plum ice cream) that have earned him a Michelin star. Set menus range from €98 to €155.
MARTÍNEZSPANISH€€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 106 60 52; www.martinezbarcelona.com; Carretera de Miramar 38; mains €21.50-32; h1-11pm; g21, jTeleférico del Puerto)
With a fabulous panorama over the city and port, Martínez is a standout among the lacklustre dining options atop Montjuïc. On warm days, head to the outdoor terrace for its signature rice and paella dishes (€38 to €62 for two). There are also oysters, calamari, fresh market fish and other seafood hits, plus jamón and grilled meat dishes.
If you’re not up for the pricey main courses, Martínez is also a fine destination for drinks at any time of day; the bar stays open until 1.30am.
2Neighbourhood Walk
Views & Gardens on Montjuïc

START CASTELL DE MONTJUÏC
END JARDINS DE JOAN MARAGALL
LENGTH 3KM; 1½ HOURS
Long synonymous with oppression, the dark history of 1Castell de Montjuïc is today overshadowed by the stupendous views it commands over the city and sea. (Don’t miss the little sea-facing trail behind the fortress.) The ride up on the Telefèric de Montjuïc is the perfect way to get here.
A short stroll down the road or the parallel Camí del Mar pedestrian trail leads to another fine viewpoint overlooking the city and sea, the 2Jardins del Mirador. Take the weight off on the park benches or pick up a snack.
Further downhill is the multitiered 3Jardins de Joan Brossa. Enter on the left just beyond Plaça de la Sardana, which has a sculpture of people engaged in the classic Catalan folk dance. More fine city views can be had from among the many Mediterranean trees and plants.
Exiting the Jardins de Joan Brossa on the western side, cross Camí Baix del Castell to the painstakingly laid out 4Jardins de Mossèn Cinto de Verdaguer. This is a beautiful setting for a slow meander among tulip beds and water lilies.
Dropping away behind the Fundació Joan Miró, the 1922-established 5Jardins de Laribal comprise a combination of terraced gardens linked by paths and stairways. The pretty sculpted watercourses along some of the stairways were inspired by Granada’s Alhambra.
While in the gardens, you can take a break for a meal if hunger strikes. 6La Font del Gat has a daily changing menu (no à la carte), and a lovely and spacious terrace dotted with orange trees and surrounded by greenery.
Continue walking west, past the Estadi Olímpic (Olympic Stadium) to reach the lovely, but little visited 7Jardins de Joan Maragall. Lush lawns, ornamental fountains, photogenic sculptures and a neoclassical palace (the Spanish royal family’s residence in Barcelona) set these gardens apart. The catch: the grounds are only open on weekends (10am to 3pm).
6DRINKING & NIGHTLIFE

oABIRRADEROBREWERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 461 94 46; www.abirradero.com; Carrer Vila i Vilà 77; h5pm-1am Mon-Thu, noon-2am Fri & Sat, noon-1am Sun; W; mParal·lel)
Barcelona is spoilt for choice with craft breweries, and this bright, buzzing space has 20 of its own beers rotating on the taps, including IPAral·lel (a double IPA), Excuse Me While I Kiss My Stout, and Tripel du Poble Sec. Tapas, sharing boards and burgers are standouts from the kitchen. You’ll occasionally catch live jazz and blues here.
oLA CASETA DEL MIGDIABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %617 956572; www.lacaseta.org; Mirador del Migdia; h8pm-1am Wed-Fri, noon-1am Sat & Sun Apr-Sep, noon-sunset Sat & Sun Oct-Mar; g150)
The effort of getting to what is, for all intents and purposes, a simple chiringuito (makeshift cafe-bar) is worth it. Gaze out to sea over a beer or coffee by day. As sunset approaches the atmosphere changes, as reggae, samba and funk wafts out over the hillside. Drinks aside, you can also order food fired up on the outdoor grills.
Walk below the walls of the Castell de Montjuïc along the dirt track or follow Passeig del Migdia – look out for signs for the Mirador del Migdia.
PERVERT CLUB @ THE ONEGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 453 05 10; http://pervert-club.negocio.site; Avinguda Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia 13; cover from €18; hmidnight-6am Sat; g13, 23, 150, mEspanya)
This weekly fest takes place at The One club in Poble Espanyol. Electronic music dominates and, in spite of the 6am finish, for many this is only the start of the ‘evening’. Expect loads of tanned and buff gym bunnies – and plenty of topless eye candy.
LA TERRRAZZACLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %687 969825; www.laterrrazza.com; Avinguda de Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia; cover from €15; hmidnight-6.30am Thu-Sat May-Sep; g13, 23, 150, mEspanya)
Come summer, La Terrrazza attracts squadrons of beautiful people, locals and foreigners alike, for a full-on night of music (mainly house, techno and electronica) and cocktails partly under the stars inside the Poble Espanyol complex.
BAR OLIMPIABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %676 828232; Carrer d’Aldana 11; h5pm-1am Mon-Wed, 5pm-2am Thu, 5pm-3am Fri, 1pm-3am Sat, 1pm-1am Sun; mParal·lel)
This great little neighbourhood bar is a small slice of Barcelona history. It was here (and on the surrounding block), where the popular Olimpia Theatre Circus performed between 1924 and 1947. Today the retro setting draws a diverse crowd, who come for house-made vermouth, snacks (like quesadillas, cheese platters and tuna tartare) and strong gin and tonics.
REDRUMBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %670 269126; Carrer de Margarit 36; h6pm-1am Mon-Thu, 6pm-2am Fri, 2pm-2am Sat, 6pm-12.30am Sun; mPoble Sec)
Redrum’s craft brews and cocktails are complemented by Mexican street food (including excellent tacos and ceviche). It has a brightly coloured interior and friendly service. Happy hour runs from 6pm to 8pm.
EL ROUGEBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %666 251556; Carrer del Poeta Cabanyes 21; h9pm-2am Thu, 10pm-3am Fri & Sat, 11am-2am Sun; W; mPoble Sec)
Decadence is the word that springs to mind in this bordello-red lounge-cocktail bar, with acid jazz, drum and bass and other sounds drifting along in the background. The walls are covered in heavy-framed paintings, dim lamps and mirrors, and no two chairs are alike. You can sometimes catch DJs, risqué poetry soirées, cabaret shows or even nights of tango dancing.
LA CAMBICHABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 187 25 13; Carrer del Poeta Cabanyes 43; h6pm-2am Mon-Wed, 1pm-2am Thu-Sun; mParal·lel)
This shoebox-sized bar feels a bit like a lost cabin in the woods with its newspaper-covered walls, lanterns and old sporting photos. Once you’ve wedged yourself alongside a tiny table, you can join the young soul- and blues-loving crowd over inexpensive empanadas and vermouth. Bands also occasionally play.
BAR CALDERSBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 329 93 49; Carrer del Parlament 25; h5pm-2am Mon-Fri, 11am-2.30am Sat, 11am-12.30am Sun; mSant Antoni)
It bills itself as a wine bar, but actually the wine selection at Bar Calders is its weak point. As an all-day cafe and tapas bar, however, it’s unbeatable, with outdoor tables on a tiny pedestrian lane, and has become the favoured meeting point for the neighbourhood’s boho element.
SALA PLATAFORMACLUB
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 329 00 29; www.salaplataforma.com; Carrer Nou de la Rambla 145; cover from €6; h10pm-6am Thu-Sat, 7pm-2am Sun; mParal.lel)
With two adjoining if smallish dance spaces, ‘Platform’ feels like a clandestine location in an otherwise quiet residential street. Inside this friendly, straightforward dance dive, you’ll find popular ’80s grooves, timeless rock and occasional live bands – plus drum and bass.
TINTA ROJABAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 443 32 43; www.tintaroja.cat; Carrer de la Creu dels Molers 17; h8.30pm-12.30am Wed, to 2am Thu, to 3am Fri & Sat, closed Aug; mPoble Sec)
A succession of nooks and crannies, dotted with flea-market finds and dimly lit in violets, reds and yellows, makes Tinta Roja an intimate spot for a craft beer, cocktail or glass of Argentinean wine – and the occasional show in the back, featuring anything from actors to acrobats.
This was once a vaqueria (small dairy farm) that kept cows out the back and sold fresh milk at the front.
METROGAY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 323 52 27; www.metrodiscobcn.com; Carrer de Sepúlveda 185; cover before/after 2am from €8/20; h12.15am-5.30am Sun-Thu, to 6.45am Fri & Sat; mUniversitat)
Metro attracts a fun-loving gay crowd with its two dance floors, three bars and very dark room. Keep an eye out for shows and parties, which can range from parades of models to bingo nights (on Thursday nights, with sometimes-interesting prizes), plus the occasional striptease.
To save cash, come before 2am, though you’re likely to be drinking all by your lonesome, as Metro doesn’t fill up till late.
3ENTERTAINMENT

SALA APOLOLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 441 40 01; www.sala-apolo.com; Carrer Nou de la Rambla 113; club from €15, concerts vary; hconcerts from 8pm, club from midnight; mParal·lel)
This is a fine old theatre, where red velvet dominates and you feel as though you’re in a movie-set dancehall scene. ‘Nasty Mondays’ and ‘Crappy Tuesdays’ are aimed at a diehard, never-stop-dancing crowd. Club entry includes a drink. Earlier in the evening, concerts generally take place here and in ‘La 2’, a smaller auditorium downstairs.
BARTSCONCERT VENUE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Barcelona Arts on Stage; %93 324 84 92; www.barts.cat; Avinguda del Paral·lel 62; mParal·lel)
BARTS has a solid reputation for its innovative line-up of urban dance troupes, electro swing, psychedelic pop and other eclectic fare. Its smart design combines a comfortable midsized auditorium with excellent acoustics. Hours and ticket prices vary; check the agenda online.
TEATRE GRECTHEATRE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; http://lameva.barcelona.cat/grec; Passeig de Santa Madrona; g55, 150)
Built in 1929 by Catalan architect Ramon Revento in ancient Greek style, this lovely stone amphitheatre on Montjuïc stages one of the city’s best summer festivals, the Festival Grec de Barcelona, with theatre, dance and music events.
GRAN BODEGA SALTÓLIVE MUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 441 37 09; www.bodegasalto.net; Carrer de Blesa 36; h7pm-2am Mon-Thu, noon-3am Fri & Sat, noon-midnight Sun; mParal·lel)
The ranks of barrels give away the bar’s history as a traditional bodega. Now, after a little homemade psychedelic redecoration with odd lamps, figurines and old Chinese beer ads, it’s a magnet for an eclectic barfly crowd. The crowd is mixed and friendly, and gets pretty animated on nights when there’s live music.
HIROSHIMALIVE PERFORMANCE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 315 54 58; www.hiroshima.cat; Carrer de Vilà i Vilà 67; h7-11pm Wed-Sun; mParal·lel)
Hiroshima is a creative lynchpin in Poble Sec. In a former elevator factory, it hosts emerging and avant-garde musicians, dancers and performing artists. There are two stages (seating 130 and 250 people, respectively) and a lively ground-floor bar where you can grab a drink after the show. For unconventional fare, this is a good place to look.
RENOIR FLORIDABLANCACINEMA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %91 542 27 02; www.cinesrenoir.com; Carrer de Floridablanca 135; mSant Antoni)
With seven screens, this cinema shows a mix of quality art-house flicks and blockbusters in their original language (with Spanish subtitles). It’s handily located just beyond El Raval, so you’ll find no shortage of post-film entertainment options nearby.
TEATRE MERCAT DE LES FLORSDANCE
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 256 26 00; www.mercatflors.cat; Carrer de Lleida 59; hbox office 11am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Fri, plus 1hr before show; g55)
Next door to the Teatre Lliure MAP GOOGLE MAP; (%93 289 27 70; www.teatrelliure.com; Plaça de Margarida Xirgu 1; hbox office 9am-8pm, plus 2hr before performance), and together with it known as the Ciutat de Teatre (Theatre City), this spacious modern stage is Barcelona’s top venue for local and international contemporary dance acts.
7 SHOPPING

POPCORN STOREFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Carrer Viladomat 30-32; h11am-3pm & 4.30-8.30pm Mon-Sat)
Cutting-edge Barcelona labels for women at this 2017-opened boutique include Sister Dew, with asymmetrical tops, jackets, dresses and more, and Ester Gueroa, with bold prints and lace. Men will find stylish shirts, trousers and belts from Italian and other European designers.
10000 RECORDSMUSIC
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 292 77 76; www.10000records.es; Carrer de Floridablanca 70; h5-8pm Mon, 10am-2pm & 5-8pm Tue-Fri, 10am-2pm Sat; mPoble Sec)
As its name suggests, this record shop overflows with vintage and new vinyl in all genres but especially rock, pop, metal and jazz. You’ll also unearth retro radios, cassettes and music books.
GI JOEFASHION & ACCESSORIES
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 329 96 52; www.gijoebcn.com; Ronda de Sant Antoni 49; h10am-2pm & 4.30-8.30pm Mon-Sat; mUniversitat)
This is the best central army-surplus warehouse. Get your khakis here, along with urban army fashion T-shirts, boots, and more. You can also find vintage WWII items.
2SPORTS & ACTIVITIES

PISCINES BERNAT PICORNELLSWIMMING
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %93 423 40 41; www.picornell.cat; Avinguda de l’Estadi 30-38; adult/child €11.90/7.30, nudist hours €6.55/4.70; h6.45am-midnight Mon-Fri, 7am-9pm Sat, 7.30am-4pm Sun; g13, 150)
Admission to Barcelona’s official Olympic pool on Montjuïc also includes use of the complex’s fitness room, sauna, Jacuzzi, steam bath and track. On Saturday nights, between 9pm and 11pm, the pool (with access to sauna and steam bath) is open only to nudists. On Sundays between October and May the indoor pool also opens for nudists only from 4.15pm to 6pm.





Day Trips from Barcelona

Girona
A splendid cathedral, a maze of narrow cobbled streets and Catalonia’s finest medieval Jewish quarter are part of this riverside town’s charms.
Figueres
The Teatre-Museu Dalí is Spain’s most surreal sight, a place of pilgrimage for any fan of Salvador Dalí, and the artist’s final resting place.
Montserrat
Catalonia’s most important shrine is in this spectacularly sited mountain monastery, complete with Europe’s oldest choir and superb scenic walks.
Sitges
A classy old town and eating scene, a pretty string of beaches, great nightlife and a hedonistic carnival await visitors at the south coast’s premier seaside town.
Tarragona
This sunny port city has a beautiful medieval core, along with some of Spain’s most extensive Roman ruins and studded with tempting eating options.

Girona
Explore
Northern Catalonia’s largest city, Girona is a jewellery box of museums, galleries and Gothic churches, strung around a web of cobbled lanes and medieval walls. Reflections of Modernista mansions shimmer in the Riu Onyar, which separates the walkable historic centre on its eastern bank from the gleaming commercial centre on the west.
The Roman town of Gerunda lay on the Via Augusta from Gades (now Cádiz) to the Pyrenees. Taken from the Muslims by the Franks in the late 8th century, Girona became the capital of one of Catalonia’s most important counties, falling under the sway of Barcelona in the late 9th century. Girona’s wealth in medieval times produced many fine Romanesque and Gothic buildings that have survived repeated attacks, while a Jewish community flourished here until its expulsion in 1492.
With Catalonia’s most diverse nightlife and dining scene outside Barcelona, Girona makes a delicious distraction from the coast.
The Best…
ASight Catedral de Girona
APlace to Eat El Celler de Can Roca 
APlace to Drink Lola Café
Top Tip
For the best views, take a walk along the top of the city walls, on the Passeig Arquelògic – accessed from the Banys Àrabs or the Plaça de Catalunya.
Getting There & Away
Car Take the AP7 (toll) motorway via Granollers
Train Regular trains run from Barcelona (from €10, up to 90 minutes)
Need to Know
ALocation 95km northeast of Barcelona
ATourist office (%972 22 65 75; www.girona.cat/turisme; Rambla de la Llibertat 1; h9am-8pm Mon-Fri, 9am-2pm & 4-8pm Sat Apr-Oct, 9am-7pm Mon-Fri, 9am-2pm & 3-7pm Sat Nov-Mar, 9am-2pm Sun year-round)
1SIGHTS

Girona’s exquisitely preserved Call (Jewish Quarter) – a labyrinth of low-slung stone arches and slender cobbled streets – flourished around narrow Carrer de la Força for six centuries, until relentless Christian persecution forced the Jews out of Spain.
oCATEDRAL DE GIRONACATHEDRAL
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.catedraldegirona.org; Plaça de la Catedral; adult/student incl Basílica de Sant Feliu €7/5; h10am-7.30pm Jul & Aug, to 6.30pm Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct, to 5.30pm Nov-Mar)
Towering over a flight of 86 steps rising from Plaça de la Catedral, Girona’s imposing cathedral is far more ancient than its billowing baroque facade suggests. Built over an old Roman forum, parts of its foundations date from the 5th century. Today, 14th-century Gothic styling – added over an 11th-century Romanesque church – dominates, though a beautiful, double-columned Romanesque cloister dates from the 12th century. With the world’s second-widest Gothic nave, it’s a formidable sight to explore, but audio guides are provided.
oMUSEU D’HISTÒRIA DELS JUEUSMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.girona.cat/call; Carrer de la Força 8; adult/child €4/free; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat, 10am-2pm Sun Jul & Aug, 10am-2pm Mon & Sun, 10am-6pm Tue-Sat Sep-Jun)
Until 1492, Girona was home to Catalonia’s second-most important medieval Jewish community, after Barcelona, and one of the country’s finest Jewish quarters. This excellent museum takes pride in Girona’s Jewish heritage, without shying away from less salubrious aspects such as Inquisition persecution and forced conversions. You also see a rare 11th-century miqvé (ritual bath) and a 13th-century Jewish house.
MUSEU DEL CINEMAMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.museudelcinema.cat; Carrer de la Sèquia 1; adult/child €5/free; h10am-8pm Jul & Aug, 10am-6pm Tue-Fri, 10am-8pm Sat, 11am-3pm Sun Sep-Jun)
There’s much more to this entrancing museum than the silver screen. Displays examine why humanity longs to indulge its imagination, probing the origins of visual storytelling, such as Chinese and Indian shadow puppets. It’s a whistle-stop tour taking in the invention of the camera obscura, the 19th-century debut of the Lumière brothers, and optical illusions using mirrors and trickery of light, including eerie phantasmagoria. Displays are in Catalan, Spanish, English and French.
BANYS ÀRABSRUINS
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.banysarabs.org; Carrer de Ferran el Catòlic; adult/child €2/1; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat, to 2pm Sun Mar-Oct, 10am-2pm Nov-Feb)
Although modelled on earlier Islamic and Roman bathhouses, the Banys Àrabs are a finely preserved, 12th-century Christian affair in Romanesque style (restored in the 13th century). The baths contain an apodyterium (changing room), with a small octagonal pool framed by slender pillars, followed by a frigidarium and tepidarium (with respectively cold and warm water) and a caldarium (a kind of sauna) heated by an underfloor furnace.
MONESTIR DE SANT PERE DE GALLIGANTSMONASTERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.mac.cat; Carrer de Santa Llúcia; adult/child incl Museu d’Arqueologia de Catalunya–Girona €4.50/3.50; h10am-6pm Tue-Sat Oct-Apr, 10am-7pm Tue-Sat May-Sep, 10am-2pm Sun year-round)
This beautiful 11th- and 12th-century Romanesque Benedectine monastery has a sublime bell tower and a splendid cloister featuring otherworldly animals and mythical creatures on the 60 capitals of its double columns; there are some great ones in the church too.
BASÍLICA DE SANT FELIUBASILICA
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; Plaça de Sant Feliu; adult/student incl Catedral €7/5; h10am-5.30pm Mon-Sat, 1-5.30pm Sun)
Just downhill from the cathedral stands Girona’s second great church, with its landmark truncated bell tower. The nave is majestic with Gothic ribbed vaulting, while St Narcissus, the city’s patron, is venerated in an enormous marble-and-jasper, late-baroque side chapel. To the right of the chapel is the saint’s Gothic, 1328 sepulchre (which previously held his remains), displaying his reclining form and scenes from his life including the conversion of women, martyrdom and expelling of an evil genie. Audio guides included.
MUSEU D’HISTÒRIA DE GIRONAMUSEUM
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.girona.cat/museuhistoria; Carrer de la Força 27; adult/student/child €4/2/free; h10.30am-5.30pm Tue-Sat Oct-Apr, 10.30am-6.30pm Tue-Sat May-Sep, 10.30am-1.30pm Sun year-round)
Eighteenth-century cloisters lend an appropriately antique feel to this journey from Roman Girona to medieval times to the present day. The museum’s highlights include an exhibition illuminating the 3rd- to 4th-century Can Pau Birol mosaic, which depicts a lively circus scene with charioteers, and an explanation of the 1808 to 1809 siege of Girona by Napoleonic troops. Many pieces on display are copies rather than originals. Spanish-, English- and French-language booklets help with the Catalan-only display labels.
MUSEU D’ART DE GIRONAGALLERY
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.museuart.com; Pujada de la Catedral 12; admission €4.50, incl Catedral and Basílica de Sant Feliu €10; h10am-7pm Tue-Sat May-Sep, to 6pm Oct-Apr, 10am-2pm Sun year-round)
Next to the cathedral, in the 12th- to 16th-century Palau Episcopal, this art gallery impresses with the scale and variety of its collection. Around 8500 pieces of art, mostly from this region, fill its displays, which ranges from Romanesque woodcarvings and murals to paintings of the city by 20th-century Polish-French artist Mela Mutter, early-20th-century sculptures by influential Catalan architect Rafael Masó i Valentí, and works by leading Modernista artist Santiago Rusiñol.
5EATING & DRINKING

There’s extraordinary variety and quality to Girona’s dining scene, from casual tapas bars and brunch-tastic cafes to paella specialists and one of the world’s best restaurants, El Celler de Can Roca. Unlike in other parts of Catalonia, vegetarians, vegans and diners with food allergies will enjoy plenty of choice here.
oLA FÁBRICACAFE€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; http://lafabrica.cc; Carrer de la Llebre 3; dishes €3-8; h9am-3pm; Wv) S
Girona’s culinary talents morph into top-quality coffee and Catalan-inspired brunchy favourites starring local ingredients at this energetic German-Canadian–owned cycle-themed cafe. Pillowy artisan torrades (toasts) – perhaps topped with avocado, feta and peppers – arrive on wooden sliders, washed down with expertly poured brews made with beans sourced from ecoconscious suppliers.
ROCAMBOLESCICE CREAM€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %972 41 66 67; www.rocambolesc.com; Carrer de Santa Clara 50; ice cream €2.90-4.50; h11am-10pm Sun-Thu, to midnight Fri & Sat)
Savour some of Spain’s most lip-smackingly delicious ice cream at Rocambolesc, part of the world-famous El Celler de Can Roca culinary clan. Candy-striped decor sets the magical scene for creatively cool concoctions like baked-apple ice cream or mandarin sorbet sprinkled with passionfruit flakes.
CAFÉ LE BISTROTCATALAN, FRENCH€€
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; %972 21 88 03; www.lebistrot.cat; Pujada de Sant Domènec 4; mains €7.50-14; hnoon-4pm & 7-11pm)
Walls are draped in jasmine and tables spill out onto stairs climbing to a 17th-century church at what might just be Girona’s most romantically set restaurant. The classic bistro-style menu twins French and Catalan cuisine, with crêpes, pastas, meaty mains, ‘pagès’ pizzas and a rainbow of salads served alongside local cheeses. Inside, it’s all check-print tiles and an old-world feel.
oEL CELLER DE CAN ROCACATALAN€€€
(%972 22 21 57; www.cellercanroca.com; Carrer Can Sunyer 48; degustation menus €180-205; h12.30-2pm Tue, 12.30-2pm & 8-9.30pm Wed-Sat, closed late Dec–mid-Jan & 10 days late Aug)
Ever-changing avant-garde takes on Catalan dishes have catapulted El Celler de Can Roca to global fame. Holding three Michelin stars, it was named the best restaurant in the world in 2015 by The World’s 50 Best. Each year brings new innovations, from molecular gastronomy to multi-sensory food-art interplay to sci-fi dessert trolleys, all with mama’s home cooking as the core inspiration.
Run by the three Girona-born Roca brothers, El Celler is set in a refurbished country house, 2km northwest of central Girona. Book online 11 months in advance or join the standby list.
LOLA CAFÈBAR
(MAP GOOGLE MAP; www.facebook.com/LolaCafe; Carrer de la Força 7; h11pm-3am Wed-Sat)
Baroque-style gilt mirrors, luscious cocktails and intimate tables for two make this a sultry night among the cobbled lanes of Girona’s medieval town. Dance into the night to live rumba or the regular mash-up of 80s and 90s pop, and stay hydrated with caipirinhas, mojitos and more. Check the Facebook page for upcoming events.
Figueres
Explore
You’ll want to spend the whole morning at the incomparable Teatre-Museu Dalí, admiring everything from the exterior to the bizarre decorative touches and Dalí’s distinctive works. But there’s more to Figueres than Dalí and there are several other attractions worth your time, as well as a clutch of good restaurants.
The Best…
ASight Teatre-Museu Dalí
APlace to Eat El Motel
APlace to Drink Sidreria Txot’s
Top Tip
It pays to reserve online in advance for the Teatre-Museu Dalí, and to visit outside weekends and public holidays. Get here for opening time to avoid the worst of the crowds.
Getting There & Away
Car Take the AP7 (toll) motorway via Granollers and Girona
Trains Trains run from Barcelona (€12 to €16, up to 2½ hours)
Need to Know
ALocation 118km northeast of Barcelona
ATourist office (%972 50 31 55; http://visitfigueres.cat; Plaça de l’Escorxador 2; h9am-8pm Mon-Sat, 10am-3pm Sun Jul-Sep, 9.30am-2pm & 4-6pm Tue-Sat, 10am-2pm Mon & Sun Oct-Jun)
WORTH A DETOUR
DALÍ’S CASTLE

If you’re intrigued by artist Salvador Dalí, the Castell de Púbol (www.salvador-dali.org; Plaça de Gala Dalí, Púbol; adult/concession €8/6; h10am-7.15pm mid-Jun–mid-Sep, 10am-5.15pm Tue-Sun mid-Mar–mid-Jun & mid-Sep–Oct, 10am-4.15pm Tue-Sun Nov-early Jan) is an essential piece of the puzzle. Between Girona and Palafrugell (22km northwest of the latter, south off the C66), this 14th-century castle was Dalí’s gift to his wife and muse Gala, who is buried here. The Gothic-Renaissance building, with creeper-covered walls, spiral stone staircases and a shady garden, was decorated to Gala’s taste, though there are surrealist touches like a grimacing anglerfish fountain and a pouting-lips sofa.
The life of Gala Dalí is fascinating in its own right, due to her entanglement with several pivotal figures in the first half of the 20th century. Gala married French poet Paul Éluard in 1917, had a two-year affair with pioneer of Dadaism Max Ernst, and then met Dalí in 1929. With Dalí’s approval she continued to take lovers, though their loyalty to each other remained fierce. Dalí was only permitted to visit the castle with advance written permission, a restriction that held considerable erotic charge for the artist.
Today the Castell de Púbol forms the southernmost point of Catalonia’s ‘Salvador Dalí triangle’. The sombre castle is almost an antithesis to the flamboyance of Figueres’ Teatre-Museu Dalí and Dalí’s seaside home (%972 25 10 15; www.salvador-dali.org; Port Lligat; adult/child under 8yr €11/free; h9.30am-9pm mid-Jun–mid-Sep, 10.30am-6pm mid-Sep–Jan & mid-Feb–mid-Jun, closed mid-Jan–mid-Feb, closed Mon Nov–mid-Mar) in Port Lligat near Cadaqués.
To get here, catch a bus to Cruilla de la Pera from Girona (€3, 40 minutes, 10 to 19 daily) or Palafrugell (€3.05, 25 minutes, seven to 13 daily), and alight at the stop on the C66 then walk 2km south to the castle. Alternatively, take a train from Girona to Flaça (€3.30, 15 minutes, at least 15 daily), then taxi the last 5km.
1SIGHTS

oTEATRE-MUSEU DALÍMUSEUM
(www.salvador-dali.org; Plaça de Gala i Salvador Dalí 5; adult/child under 9yr €14/free; h9am-8pm Jul-Sep, 10.30am-6pm Oct-Jun, closed Mon Oct-May, also open 10pm-1am Aug)
The first name that pops into your head when you lay eyes on this red castle-like building, topped with giant eggs and stylised Oscar-like statues and studded with plaster-covered croissants, is Salvador Dalí. An entirely appropriate final resting place for the master of surrealism, it has assured his immortality. Exhibits range from enormous, impossible-to-miss installations – like Taxi Plujós (Rainy Taxi), an early Cadillac surmounted by statues – to the more discreet, including a tiny, mysterious room with a mirrored flamingo.
MUSEU DEL JOGUETMUSEUM
(www.mjc.cat; Carrer de Sant Pere 1; adult/child €7/free; h10am-7pm Mon-Sat & 11am-6pm Sun Jun-Sep, 10am-6pm Tue-Sat, 11am-2pm Sun Oct-May)
This museum has more than 5000 toys from throughout the ages – from the earliest board games involving coloured stones, to intricate dolls’ houses, to 1920s dolls with baleful stares that may haunt your dreams, to choo-chooing train models, to Catalonia- and Valencia-made religious processions of tiny figures. It’s a mesmerising display, with plenty to amuse the kids, and a section devoted to Dalí’s childhood. Admission is reduced by 30% if you flash a Teatre-Museu Dalí ticket.
CASTELL DE SANT FERRANFORT
(www.lesfortalesescatalanes.info; Pujada del Castell; adult/child €3.50/free; h10am-8pm Jul–mid-Sep, 10.30am-6pm mid-Sep–Oct & Apr-Jun, 10.30am-3pm Nov-Mar)
Figueres’ sturdy 18th-century fortress commands the surrounding plains from a low hill 1km northwest of the centre. The complex is a wonder of military engineering: it sprawls over 32 hectares, with the capacity for 6000 men to march within its walls and snooze in military barracks. Admission fees include clanking audio guides (nearly as old as the castle).
Built in the 1750s to repel French invaders, the fortress nevertheless fell to its Gallic neighbours – both in 1794 and 1808. Spain’s Republican government held its final meeting of the civil war (on 1 February, 1939) in the dungeons here.
MUSEU DE L’EMPORDÀMUSEUM
(www.museuemporda.org; La Rambla 2; adult/child €4/free; h11am-8pm Tue-Sat May-Oct, 11am-7pm Tue-Sat Nov-Apr, 11am-2pm Sun year-round)
Extending over four floors, the local museum time travels from ancient amphorae to 7th-century sculptures to rotating installations of contemporary art. The region’s culture and history are presented in a fragmented way, but it’s an enjoyable journey. The 17th-century religious art is especially worthy of attention. Don’t miss a colour-bursting 1962 Sant Narcís by Dalí.
Labels are in Catalan, though there are laminated information cards in Spanish, English and French. Admission is free with a Teatre-Museu Dalí ticket.
5EATING & DRINKING

SIDRERIA TXOT’SCATALAN, BASQUE€
(%972 67 85 23; www.sidreriatxots.com; Avinguda Salvador Dalí 114; dishes €5-16; hnoon-midnight; W)
Watch your Basque cider poured from on high (the way it’s supposed to be) at this lively all-day cider bar with a summer garden. Then tuck into hot and cold pintxos (Basque tapas), tasty burgers, cured meats, cheeses and salads, as well as potato omelette, chorizo in cider and L’Escala anchovies.
RESTAURANT DURÁNCATALAN€€
(%972 50 12 50; www.hotelduran.com; Carrer Lasauca 5; mains €16-25; h12.45-4pm & 8.30-11pm)
Dine under the same roof as Salvador Dalí at this top-class, chandelier-lit restaurant, where smart service and plush decor are matched by such expertly prepared delights as smoked-salmon tartare, sole in orange sauce and pineapple carpaccio topped by mango ice cream. There’s a €22, three-course set menu, along with a seasonal tasting menu (€49) if you can’t decide.
EL MOTELCATALAN€€€
(%972 50 05 62; www.hotelemporda.com; Hotel Empordà, Avinguda Salvador Dalí 170; mains €13-30; h12.45-3.45pm & 8.30-10.30pm; pW)
Jaume Subirós, the chef and owner of this smart roadside hotel-restaurant 1km north of Figueres’ centre, is a seminal figure of the transition from traditional Catalan home cooking to the polished, innovative affair it is today. Local, seasonal ingredients star on the menu, which may feature highlights like salted Roses shrimp, ricotta-and-parmesan-stuffed courgette flowers, and rice with Cap de Creus lobster.
Montserrat
Explore
Montserrat, 50km northwest of Barcelona, is at the heart of Catalan identity for its mountain, monastery and natural park weaving among distinctive rock formations. Montserrat mountain is instantly recognisable, sculpted over millennia by wind and frost. Its turrets of rock, a coarse conglomerate of limestone and eroded fragments, extend like gnarled fingers from its 1236m-high bulk. More than halfway up the mountain lies the Benedictine Monestir de Montserrat, home to La Moreneta (‘Little Brown One’, or ‘Black Virgin’), one of Spain’s most revered icons. Extending from this sacred spot is the Parc Natural de la Muntanya de Montserrat, superlative hiking terrain where brooks tumble into ravines and lookout points deliver panoramas of rocky pillars.
Montserrat (often used interchangeably for the monastery and mountain) is a hugely popular day trip from Barcelona. The monastery throngs with visitors, but serenity can still be found on the walking trails or by staying overnight.
The Best…
ASight Monestir de Montserrat
APlace to Eat Hotel Abat Cisneros
AWalk Sant Jeroni
Top Tip
Getting to Montserrat is half the fun, including the cog-wheel and funicular railways, and various combination packages are available at www.cremallerademontserrat.cat.
Getting There & Away
Car By car, take the C16 northwest from Barcelona, then the C58 northwest shortly beyond Terrassa, followed by the C55 south to Monistrol de Montserrat. You can leave your vehicle at the free car park and take the cremallera up to the top, or drive up and park (cars €6.50).
Train The R5 line trains operated by FGC (www.fgc.net) run half-hourly to hourly to/from Barcelona’s Plaça d’Espanya station (one hour). Services start at 5.16am, but take the 8.36am train to connect with the first AERI cable car to the monastery from the Montserrat Aeri stop. Alternatively, take the R5 to the next stop on (Monistrol de Montserrat), from where cremallera trains run up to the monastery (20 minutes) every 20 to 40 minutes.
Need to Know
ALocation 50km northwest of Barcelona
ATourist office (%938 77 77 77; www.montserratvisita.com; h9am-8pm Easter-Sep, to 5.45pm Oct-Easter)
1SIGHTS

oMONESTIR DE MONTSERRATMONASTERY
(www.abadiamontserrat.net)
Catalonia’s most renowned monastery was established in 1025 to commemorate local shepherds’ visions of the Virgin Mary, accompanied by celestial light and a chorus of holy music. Today, a community of 55 monks lives here. The monastery complex encompasses two blocks: on one side, the basilica and monastery buildings, and on the other, tourist and pilgrim facilities. Admirable monastery architecture lining the main Plaça de Santa Maria includes elegant 15th-century cloisters and a gleaming late-19th-century facade depicting St George and St Benedict in relief.
MUSEU DE MONTSERRATMUSEUM
(www.museudemontserrat.com; Plaça de Santa Maria; adult/child €7/4, incl Espai (space) audiovisual €10/6; h10am-5.45pm Mon-Fri, 10am-6.45pm Sat & Sun)
This museum has excellent displays, ranging from an archeological section with an Egyptian mummy to Gothic altarpieces to fine canvases by Caravaggio, El Greco, Picasso and several Impressionists (Monet, Degas), as well as a comprehensive collection of 20th-century Catalan art, and some fantastic Orthodox icons.
CAMBRIL DE LA MARE DE DÉUCHURCH
(h8-10.30am & noon-6.30pm, plus 7.30-8pm Jul–mid-Sep)
Signs to the right of the entrance to Montserrat’s main basilica lead into the intimate Cambril de la Mare de Déu, where you can pay homage to the famous La Moreneta (‘Little Brown One’, or ‘Black Virgin’), a revered 12th-century Romanesque wood-carved statue of the Virgin Mary with Jesus seated on her knee.
3ENTERTAINMENT

ESCOLANIA DE MONTSERRATLIVE MUSIC
(www.escolania.cat; hperformances 1pm Mon-Thu, 11am Sun, 6.45pm Sun-Thu)
The clear voices of one of Europe’s oldest boys’ choirs have echoed through the basilica since the 14th century. The choir performs briefly on most days (except school holidays), singing Virolai, written by Catalonia’s national poet Jacint Verdaguer, and Salve Regina. The 50 escolanets, aged between nine and 14, go to boarding school in Montserrat and must endure a two-year selection process to join the choir.
WALKING IN MONTSERRAT

Take the 10-minute Funicular de Sant Joan (www.cremallerademontserrat.cat; one-way/return €8.10/13; hevery 12-20min 10am-4.50pm Nov-Mar, to 5.50pm Sep, Oct, Apr & May, to 6.50pm Jul–mid-Sep, closed 3 weeks Jan) for the first 250m uphill from the monastery; alternatively, it’s a 45-minute walk along the road between the funicular’s lower and upper stations. From the top, it’s a 20-minute stroll (signposted) to the Ermita de Sant Joan, with fine westward views.
More exciting is the signposted 7.5km (2½-hour) loop walk from the Funicular de Sant Joan’s upper station, northwest to Montserrat’s highest peak, Sant Jeroni (1236m), then back. The walk takes you across the upper part of the mountain, with a close-up experience of some of the rock pillars.
Wear good walking boots, bring water, and, before setting out, check with the tourist office regarding weather and trail conditions.
4SLEEPING & EATING

HOTEL ABAT CISNEROSHOTEL€€
(%93 877 77 01; www.montserratvisita.com; s/d incl breakfast €66/114; pW)
The only hotel in the monastery complex has a superb location opposite the basilica. Rooms are comfortable though simple; some make up for the spartan decor with views across Plaça de Santa Maria. There are also inexpensive basic apartments (four people €104). The house restaurant serves imaginative Catalonian dishes (mains €13 to €23).
Sitges
Explore
Sitges has been a resort town since the 19th century, and was a key location for the Modernisme movement, which paved the way for the likes of Picasso. These days it’s Spain’s most famous gay holiday destination. In July and August, Sitges cranks up the volume to become one big beach party, while Carnaval (www.carnavaldesitges.com; hFeb/Mar) unbridles the town’s hedonistic side. But despite the bacchanalian nightlife, Sitges remains a classy destination: its array of galleries and museums belie its small size, there’s a good choice of upmarket restaurants in its historic centre (which is lined with chic boutiques), and the October film festival (Festival Internacional de Cinema Fantàstic de Catalunya; www.sitgesfilmfestival.com; hOct) draws culture fiends from miles around.
The Best…
ASight Museu del Cau Ferrat
APlace to Eat El Cable
APlace to Drink Casablanca
Top Tip
There is a lovely 8km walk south along the coast to Vilanova, from which there are frequent trains back to Sitges (or Barcelona).
Getting There & Away
Car The best road from Barcelona is the C32 (toll) motorway. More scenic is the C31, which hooks up with the C32 after Castelldefels, but it is often busy and slow.
Train From 5am to 10pm, regular R2 rodalies trains run to Barcelona Passeig de Gràcia and Sants (€4.10, 45 minutes). For Barcelona airport (€4.10, 40 minutes), change at El Prat de Llobregat.
Need to Know
ALocation 35km southwest of Barcelona
ATourist Office (%938 94 42 51; www.sitgestur.cat; Plaça Eduard Maristany 2; h10am-2pm & 4-8pm Mon-Sat mid-Jun–mid-Oct, 10am-2pm & 4-6.30pm Mon-Sat mid-Oct–mid-Jun, 10am-2pm Sun year-round)
1SIGHTS

The most beautiful part of Sitges is the headland area, where noble Modernista palaces and mansions strike poses around the pretty Església de Sant Bartomeu i Santa Tecla, with the sparkling-blue Mediterranean as a backdrop.
oMUSEU DEL CAU FERRATMUSEUM
(www.museusdesitges.cat; Carrer de Fonollar; incl Museu Maricel del Mar adult/child €10/free; h10am-8pm Tue-Sun Jul-Sep, to 7pm Apr-Jun & Oct, to 5pm Nov-Mar)
Built in the 1890s as a house-studio by Catalan artist Santiago Rusiñol, a pioneer of the Modernisme movement, this seaside mansion is crammed with his own art and that of his contemporaries (including his friend Picasso), as well as his extensive private collection of ancient relics and antiques. The visual feast is piled high, from Grecian urns and a 15th-century baptismal font to 18th-century tilework that glitters all the way to the floral-painted wood-beamed ceiling.
MUSEU MARICEL DEL MARMUSEUM
(www.museusdesitges.cat; Carrer de Fonollar; incl Museu del Cau Ferrat adult/child €10/free; h10am-8pm Tue-Sun Jul-Sep, to 7pm Apr-Jun & Oct, to 5pm Nov-Mar)
This seafront building entered through the adjacent Museu del Cau Ferrat houses a vast collection of Catalan art spanning the 10th to 20th centuries, including works amassed by the town of Sitges and local collector Jesús Pérez-Rosales. Most spectacular is the downstairs atrium of neoclassical sculptures, framed by arches that overlook the sea.
ESGLÉSIA DE SANT BARTOMEU I SANTA TECLACHURCH
(Plaça de l’Ajuntament; hMass 7.30pm Mon-Fri, 8pm Sat, 9am, 11am, 12.30pm & 7.30pm Sun, hours vary)
Sitges’ most striking landmark is this 17th-century parish church, sitting proudly on a rocky outcrop lapped by the sea, which separates the 2km-long main beach to the southwest from the smaller sandy strands to the northeast.
SITGES BEACHES

Dotted with chiringuitos (beach bars), Sitges’ main beach is divided into nine sections (with different names) by a series of breakwaters and flanked by the attractive seafront Passeig Marítim. The most central beaches are lively La Fragata, just below Sant Bartomeu church, and La Ribera, immediately west. About 500m southwest of the centre, L’Estanyol has summer chiringuitos with sunbeds; 1.5km further southwest, Les Anquines and Terramar have paddleboat rental and deck chairs in summer. Northeast of the centre lie easy-access Sant Sebastià, sheltered Balmins (favoured by nudists; 1km northeast of town) and brown-sand Aiguadolç (500m further east). Bassa Rodona, immediately west of the centre, is Sitges’ famous unofficial ‘gay beach’, though gay sunbathers are now spread out pretty evenly.
5EATING & DRINKING

oEL CABLETAPAS€
(%938 94 87 61; www.facebook.com/elcablebarsitges; Carrer de Barcelona 1; tapas €2-6; h7-11.30pm Mon-Fri, 12-3.30pm & 7-11.30pm Sat & Sun)
Always packed, down-to-earth El Cable might just be Sitges’ most loved tapas bar, rolling out classics like patatas bravas (often branded the best in town) alongside divine, inventive bite-sized creations. Try the veggie-stuffed puff-pastry ‘saquito’ or the award-winning mushroom-filled squid with risotto and almond praline. Wash it all down with fine organic Penedès wines, rustled up by welcoming waiters.
EL POUTAPAS, FUSION€
(%93 013 47 98; www.elpoudesitges.com; Carrer de Sant Bonaventura 21; dishes €5-10; h8-11.30pm Mon, Wed & Thu, 1.30-3.30pm & 8-11.30pm Fri-Sun; W)
Tiny Wagyu beef burgers, noodle stir-fries, burrata salads, and classics like anchovies, local-cheese boards and honey-fried aubergines crowd tables at this friendly gourmet tapas place, where Catalan and Asian flavours mingle. The presentation is as artful as the creative ingredient combinations.
LADY GREENVEGETARIAN, VEGAN€€
(%931 71 59 14; www.facebook.com/ladygreensitges; Carrer de Sant Pau 11; 2-/3-course set menu €15/20; h7-10pm Mon, 1-4pm & 7-10pm Tue, Wed & Sun, 1-4pm & 7-11pm Thu-Sat, closed Mon & Tue approx Nov-May; Wv)
Zesty Mexican platters, veggie burgers, falafel with quinoa tabouli, and delectable American-style vegan cheesecake: vegetarian Lady Green will satisfy even the most demanding taste buds with its imaginative meat-free dishes, bold flavours and wonderful desserts. There are also vegan and gluten-free choices, plus invigorating fresh juices and smoothies.
CASABLANCABAR
(Carrer de Pau Barrabeig 5; h8pm-2am Thu-Sat)
This cocktail-driven bar exudes nostalgia with its old-timey soundtrack, vintage furnishings and bygone Hollywood stars crowding its walls. A selection of classy cocktails are stirred by seasoned staff who extend an exuberant welcome to a mainly 30+ clientele.
Tarragona
Explore
In this effervescent port city, Roman history collides with beaches, bars and a food scene that perfumes the air with freshly grilled seafood. The biggest lure is the wealth of ruins in Spain’s second-most important Roman site, including a mosaic-packed museum and a seaside amphitheatre. A roll-call of fantastic places to eat gives you good reason to linger in the knot of lanes in the attractive medieval centre, flanked by a towering cathedral with Romanesque and Gothic flourishes.
Tarragona is also a gateway to the Costa Daurada’s sparkling beaches and the feast of Modernisme architecture in nearby Reus (www.gaudicentre.cat; Plaça del Mercadal 3, Reus; adult/child €9/5; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat Jun-Sep, 10am-2pm & 4-7pm Mon-Sat Oct-May, 10am-2pm Sun year-round).
The Best…
ASight Museu d’Història de Tarragona
APlace to Eat Barquet
Top Tip
ADon’t visit Tarragona on a Sunday or Monday – you’ll find your sightseeing options drastically curtailed.
Getting There & Away
Train The station is a 10-minute walk south of the old town near the beach, with services to/from Barcelona (from €8.05, one to 1½ hours)
Car Take the C32 toll road along the coast via Castelldefels or the AP7 (toll) motorway
Need to Know
ALocation 83km southwest of Barcelona
ATourist Office (%977 25 07 95; www.tarragonaturisme.es; Carrer Major 39; h10am-8pm late Jun-Sep, 10am-2pm & 3-5pm Mon-Fri, 10am-2pm & 3-7pm Sat, 10am-2pm Sun Oct-late Jun)
1SIGHTS

MUSEU D’HISTÒRIA DE TARRAGONARUINS
(MHT; www.tarragona.cat/patrimoni/museu-historia; adult/child per site €3.30/free, all sites €7.40/free; hsites 9am-9pm Tue-Sat, 9am-3pm Sun Easter-Sep, 9am-7pm Tue-Sat, 9am-3pm Sun Oct-Easter)
The Museu d’Història de Tarragona consists of various Unesco World Heritage Roman sites, as well as some other historic buildings around town. A combined ticket covers the Pretori i Circ Romans, Amfiteatre Romà, Passeig Arqueològic Muralles and Fòrum de la Colònia. Get exploring!
oMUSEU NACIONAL ARQUEOLÒGIC DE TARRAGONAMUSEUM
(www.mnat.cat; Plaça del Rei 5; adult/child €4.50/free; h9.30am-6pm Tue-Sat Oct-May, to 8.30pm Jun-Sep, 10am-2pm Sun year-round)
This excellent museum does justice to the cultural and material wealth of Roman Tarraco. The mosaic collection traces changing trends from simple black-and-white designs to complex full-colour creations; highlights include the fine 2nd- or 3rd-century Mosaic de la Medusa and the large, almost complete 3rd-century Mosaic dels Peixos de la Pineda, showing fish and sea creatures. Explanations are mostly in Catalan and Spanish, but there are English-language booklets across the galleries.
oCATEDRAL DE TARRAGONACATHEDRAL
(www.catedraldetarragona.com; Plaça de la Seu; adult/child €5/3; h10am-8pm Mon-Sat mid-Jun–mid-Sep, 10am-7pm Mon-Sat mid-Mar–mid-Jun & mid-Sep–Oct, 10am-5pm Mon-Fri, 10am-7pm Sat Nov–mid-Mar)
Crowning the town, Tarragona’s cathedral incorporates both Romanesque and Gothic features, as typified by the main facade. The flower-filled cloister has Gothic vaulting and Romanesque carved capitals, one of which shows rats conducting a cat’s funeral…until the cat comes back to life! Chambers off the cloister display the remains of a Roman temple (unearthed in 2015) and the Museu Diocesà, its collection extending from Roman hairpins to 13th- and 14th-century polychrome Virgin woodcarvings. Don’t miss the east nave’s 14th-century frescoes.
PRETORI I CIRC ROMANS
RUINS
(Plaça del Rei; adult/child €3.30/free; h9am-9pm Tue-Sat, 9am-3pm Sun Easter-Sep, 9am-7pm Tue-Sat, 9am-3pm Sun Oct-Easter)
This sizeable complex with two separate entrances includes part of the vaults of Tarragona’s well-preserved, late-1st-century Roman circus, where chariot races were once held, as well as the Plaça del Rei’s Pretori tower (climb it for 360° city views) and part of the provincial forum, the political heart of Roman Tarraconensis province. The circus, over 300m long and accommodating 30,000 spectators, stretched from here to beyond Plaça de la Font to the west.
5EATING

BARQUETSEAFOOD€€
(%977 24 00 23; www.restaurantbarquet.com; Carrer del Gasòmetre 16; mains €12-22; h12.30-3.30pm Mon, 12.30-3.30pm & 8.30-10pm Tue-Fri, 1-3.30pm & 9-10.30pm Sat)
This popular neighbourhood restaurant is a short downhill stroll south from Tarragona centre. It’s deservedly famous for its expertly concocted rice dishes bursting with maritime flavour, and also does great seafood raciones (large plates). Don’t be fooled by the nautical warehouse interior: fish dishes and desserts are executed with finesse.
DEGVSTAFUSION, CATALAN€€
(%977 25 24 28; www.degvsta.com; Carrer Cavallers 6; mains €15-19; h1.30-4pm Mon, 1.30-4pm & 9-10.30pm Tue-Sat)
Beyond a stylish lounge/bar hides this rustic-chic restaurant styled in cool creams, adorned with a claw-foot bath tub (!) and specialising in deliciously inventive contemporary Catalan cuisine. Dishes delivered with flair might be avocado gazpacho, citrus-infused sea bass, fancied-up pa amb tomàquet or sheep’s-cheese salad with zingy strawberry vinaigrette. People pack in for the three-course weekday lunch menú (€16).
AQMEDITERRANEAN, FUSION€€
(%977 21 59 54; www.aq-restaurant.com; Carrer de les Coques 7; mains €11-24; h1.30-3.30pm & 8.30-11pm)
The crisp interior design of this palm-patterned restaurant promises fine dining and AQ amply delivers, with its impeccably crafted, playfully executed fusion dishes taking inspiration from Catalan, Italian and Asian cuisines. Treat your taste buds to squid-ink croquettes, chunky strips of patatas bravas, grilled Wagyu steak, cod-and-aubergine teriyaki or wok-fried mussels.
ARCS RESTAURANTCATALAN€€€
(%977 21 80 40; www.restaurantarcs.com; Carrer de Misser Sitges 13; mains €17-22; h1-4pm & 8.30-11pm Tue-Sat)
Inside a medieval cavern decorated with bright contemporary art and original Gothic arches, dine on Catalan dishes that follow the seasons (some traditional, others updated). Sample duck with hazelnut-and-vermouth sauce, salmon tataki with wasabi ice cream, or the always-excellent catch of the day. Desserts please the eye as much as the taste buds.




=====================================================================================================================================================================
=====================================================================================================================================================================
=====================================================================================================================================================================




At the feet of the Canigou, the little town of Prades, place of exile from Franco’s Spain of cellist Pablo (Pau) Casals, served as a focus of Catalan resistance until 1975.
  Most of the region’s attractions are easily reached by public transport from Roussillon’s capital, Perpignan. The coast and foothills between it and the Spanish frontier are beautiful, especially at Collioure, though predictably crowded and in most places overdeveloped. You’ll find the finest spots in the Tech and Têt valleys which slice southwest towards the high peaks, among them the Romanesque monasteries of Serrabona, St-Michel-de-Cuixà and St-Martin-du-Canigou, the world-class modern art museum at Céret, and Mont Canigou itself, lapped by foothill orchards of peaches and cherries.

Perpignan and around
This far south, climate and geography alone would ensure a palpable Spanish influence. Moreover, a good part of PERPIGNAN’s population is of Spanish origin – refugees from the Civil War and their descendants. The southern influence is further augmented by a substantial contingent of North Africans, including both Arabs and white French settlers repatriated after Algerian independence in 1962. Given its relatively grubby appearance, few will want to stay here for more than a day or two; if you have your own transport, you may prefer to base yourself somewhere in the surrounding area.

Casa Païral
Place de Verdun • 10.30am–6pm; closed Mon & bank holidays • €2 •  04 68 35 42 05
The best place to begin explorations of Perpignan is at Le Castillet, built as a gateway in the fourteenth century and now home to the Casa Païral, an interesting museum of Roussillon’s Catalan rural culture and the anti-French rebellions of 1661–74, when the tower held captured Catalan insurgents.
Place de la Loge
A short distance from place de Verdun down rue Louis-Blanc lies place de la Loge, focus of the pedestrianized heart of the old town, with a voluptuous Venus statue by Aristide Maillol in the centre. Dominating the cafés and brasseries of the narrow square is Perpignan’s most interesting building, the Gothic Loge de Mer (1397). Designed to hold the city’s stock exchange and maritime court, it features gargoyles, lancet windows and lacy balustrades up top. Adjacent stand the sixteenth-century hôtel de ville, with its magnificent wrought-iron gates and with another Maillol (La Méditerranée) in the courtyard, and the fifteenth-century Palais de la Députation, once the parliament of Roussillon.
Cathédrale St-Jean-Baptiste
Place Gambetta • Mon–Sat 8am–6pm (closes 7pm June–Sept), Sun 2–6pm • Free • Campo Santo Oct–April Tues–Sun 11am–5pm; closed May–Sept
From place de la Loge, rue St-Jean leads northeast to the fourteenth-century Cathédrale St-Jean on place Gambetta, its external walls built of alternating bands of river stones and brick. The dimly lit interior is most interesting for its elaborate Catalan altarpieces and for the fourteenth-century, Rhenish polychrome Crucifixion known as the Dévôt Christ; it’s in the fifth side chapel along the north wall, and was probably brought from the Low Countries by a travelling merchant. Out of the side door, a few steps on the left, you’ll find the entrance to the Campo Santo, a vast enclosure that’s one of France’s oldest cemeteries, occasionally used for summer concerts.
CATALAN CUISINE
Characterized by the wide variety of ingredients that grow throughout the different climates between the mountains and the sea, Catalonia’s distinctive food depends on its use of contrasting (sweet, savoury and sour) flavours within the five fundamental sauces of Catalan cuisine. The most important of these is sofregit, a tomato-based sauce with caramelized onion that’s used ubiquitously. The most popular traditional dishes include ollada (pork stew), bullinada (similar to paella but with potatoes instead of rice) and regional favourite, Boles de Picolat (meatballs). Catalans have a sweet tooth too and produce a variety of custardy desserts like Pa d’ous (flan) and crema catalane as well as the wonderful sweet wines of Banyuls and Rivesaltes.
The Maghrebian and Romany quarters
South of the cathedral, rue de la Révolution-Française and rue de l’Anguille lead into the teeming, dilapidated Maghrebian and Romany quarter, where women congregate on the secluded inner lanes but are seldom seen on the busier thoroughfares. Here you’ll find North African shops and cafés, especially on rue Llucia, and a daily market on place Cassanyes. Uphill and north from this stands the elegant church of St-Jacques (Tues–5pm 11am–5pm; free), which was built in two phases in the fourteenth and eighteenth centuries; it abuts La Miranda gardens, atop a section of the old city walls.
Palais des Rois de Majorque
Rue Archers • Daily: June–Sept 10am–6pm; Oct–May 9am–5pm • €4 •  04 68 34 96 26
A twenty-minute walk southwest through place des Esplanades brings you to the main entrance of the Palais des Rois de Majorque, which crowns the hill that dominates the southern part of the old town. Although Vauban’s walls surround it now, and it’s suffered generally from on-going military use until 1946, the two-storey palace and its partly arcaded courtyard date originally from the late thirteenth century. There are frequent worthwhile temporary exhibits in the former king’s apartments.
Musée Hyacinthe Rigaud
16 rue de l’Ange, near place Arago • Tues–Sun 10.30am–6pm • €5 •  04 68 35 43 40
The collection at the Musée Hyacinthe Rigaud is devoted largely to Catalan painters, most notably Minorcan-born Pierre Daura (1896–1976), a Republican and godson of Pablo Casals long exiled in the US: his sympathies are evident in two symbolic canvases of the post-Civil-War Republican refugee camps at nearby Argelès. One room has a few Maillol sketches and statues, and three portraits by Picasso. Expect some disruption as the museum has just been awarded €10 million to expand to become a major “cultural destination” sometime in 2017.
Forteresse de Salses
Guided tours: April–Sept 10am–6.30pm; Oct–March 10am–12.15pm & 2–5pm • €7.50 •  salses.monuments-nationaux.fr • Trains to Salses depart from Perpignan every 30min (13min)
An interesting stop 15km north of Perpignan is the Forteresse de Salses, in the town of Salses-le-Château. This late fifteenth-century Spanish-built fort, on the north end of town, was one of the first to be designed with a ground-hugging profile to protect it from artillery fire. It housed around one thousand troops and was entirely self-sufficient with wells, irrigation systems and even a bakery within the walls. Tours are in French but afterwards you will be able to explore some parts on your own.
Tautavel
Tautavel, 25km northwest of Perpignan off the St-Paul-de-Fenouillet road, might not have much to see, but is interesting anthropologically. In 1971 the remains of the oldest known European hominid – dated to around 450,000 years old – were discovered in the nearby Caune d’Arago cave, and a reconstruction of the skull and other cave finds are displayed in the village’s Musée de la Préhistoire (daily: 10am–12.30pm & 2–6pm; July–Aug 10am–7pm; €8;  450000ans.com).
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: PERPIGNAN
By plane From the airport at Rivesaltes, 6km north (no-frills flights from UK), there are shuttle buses every 30min into town (€1), which call at bd St Assiscle to link up with the gare routière and gare SNCF.
By train The train station is at the end of av General-de-Gaulle to the west of the city centre; it is connected to the bus station by way of a tunnel under the tracks. All regional train journeys cost €1.
Destinations Barcelona (3 daily; 2hr 30min); Collioure (8–12 daily; 25min); Narbonne (approx every 30min; 30–45min); Villefranche (8 daily; 55min).
By bus The bus station is on bd Saint Assiscle, to the west of the city centre. All regional bus journeys cost €1.
Destinations Banyuls-sur-Mer (4 daily except Sun; 45min); Céret (15 daily; 40min); Collioure (3 daily; 45min); Latour-de-Carol (2–3 daily; 2hr); Prades (approx every 30min; 55min); via the Tech valley to Prats-de-Molló (2–3 daily; 1hr 40min); Quillan (2 daily; 2hr); Tet valley to Mont-Louis (3–4 daily; 2hr 15min).
Tourist office Place François Arago (mid-June to mid-Sept Mon–Sat 9am–7pm, Sun 10am–4pm; rest of year Mon–Sat 9am–6pm, Sun 11am–2pm;  04 68 66 30 30,  perpignantourisme.com).
ACCOMMODATION
D’Aragon 17 av Gilbert Brutus  04 68 54 04 46,  aragon-hotel.com. A bit out of the way, but handy for the Palais des Rois de Majorque, Aragon is a two-star with simple, unfussy rooms and parking nearby. €58
De la Loge 1 Fabriques d’en Nabot  04 68 34 41 02,  hoteldelaloge.fr. Smack in the centre of town, this is a tastefully renovated medieval mansion with a central courtyard, on a quiet alley. Try to get a room facing the courtyard if you want a peaceful sleep. Breakfast €5. €70
 New Christina 51 Cours Lassus  04 68 35 12 21,  hotel-newchristina.com. Sited a 5min stroll northeast of the old town centre and overlooking a large wooded park. The en-suite rooms within are comfortable if a little charmless, made up for by the irresistible fifth-floor plunge pool and sun terrace with views to the park. Disabled access. Closes Dec 20 for one month. €93
EATING, DRINKING AND ENTERTAINMENT
For a city of Perpignan’s size, restaurants, bars and clubs are quite thin on the ground. However, there’s the Trobades festival celebrating the medieval heritage of the region (in late September) and other events like the October-long Jazzèbre festival. But Perpignan’s best-known spectacle is La Procession de la Sanch, the Good Friday procession of red-hooded penitents that goes from the church of St-Jacques to the cathedral between 3pm and 5pm. Nightlife is largely confined to wine/tapas bars in the narrow alleyways of the old centre while young clubbers journey to the modern coastal resort of Canet Plage at weekends.
Bio Deux Anges 39 rue des Augustins  04 68 08 78 32,  biodeuxanges.com. Organic, vegetarian restaurant with nutritionally balanced menus from €15.50 based around whole grains such as quinoa and Camargue rice. Tues–Sat 9am–7pm.
 Boulangerie Chez Ben Bouzid Place Cassanyes  04 68 67 09 58. Savour the scent of a true boulangerie as you enter this gourmet tribute to France’s colonial past. Serves a selection of French and North African breads plus irresistibly sticky pastries for little more than €1. Daily 8am–5pm.
Café La Dolce Vita Place de la Révolution-Française   04 68 62 83 27. A delightful café on the edge of the St Jacques quarter with shaded tables next to an old marble well. Daily noon till around 6pm; closes later at weekends according to demand.
Café Vienne 3 place Arago  04 68 34 80 00. Specializing in seafood, this large nonstop pavement restaurant churns out three courses for €18 rising to €25 in the evening. The €25 “Oyster Seller’s Tray”, with all manner of tasty crustaceans is the highlight. Fri–Sat noon–midnight; Sun–Thurs noon–11pm.
Casa Sansa 2 rue Fabriques-Couvertes  04 68 50 48 01. In a smart side street, this place, with its bullfight posters and old photos on the wall, serves traditional regional dishes such as suquet-bouillabaisse, a Catalan take on the famous Marseillan fish broth. Menus start at around €17. Daily noon–2pm & 7–10.30pm.
New Bodega 3bis rue Voltaire  04 68 35 21 87,  lanew-bodega.e-monsite.com. A tapas restaurant rather than bar, with severely limited seating – booking is advisable at weekends. It’s straightforward classic tapas: patatas bravas, gambas planxa calamari and the like, with prices mostly hovering around the €5 mark, and all joyfully prepared behind the large glass screen next to the tables. Daily noon–2pm & 7–11pm.
 Le P’Ti Resto 6 rue Sainte-Magdeleine  09 54 38 53 58. A restaurant for more adventurous carnivores, this is the place to try tartare. Every dish is vibrant, with accompaniments chosen as much for their colour as their contrasting tastes: try the lobster tartare served with a roast onion and broad bean salad and lobster jus. Menus from €16. Noon–2pm & 7–11pm except all Sun and Mon lunch.
 La Table 5 rue de la Poissonnerie  09 53 17 03 01. Perpignan’s gourmet choice delivers beautifully presented plates (and slates) in atmospheric surroundings. Three-course menus start from €24 or if it’s a special occasion try the decadent “menu de la Sylvestre” with lobster, foie gras and champagne for €65. Mon 7–10pm, Tues & Wed noon–2pm & 7–10pm, Thurs noon–2pm & 7–10.30pm, Fri & Sat noon–2pm & 7–11.30pm.
Castlenou
Twenty kilometres southwest of Perpignan, beyond the winemaking town of Thuir, is CASTELNOU, one of the best-preserved villages in the Pyrenees. Surrounded by rolling hills of sun-baked scrub and oak, there’s little sign of modernization for miles around, save for the road to the village. Through the pedestrianized fourteenth-century portal, the village rambles up towards the pentagon-shaped Château de Castelnou (Oct–April Sat–Wed 11am–5pm; May–Sept daily 10am–7pm; €5.50;  04 68 53 22 91,  chateaudecastelnou.fr) – a worthwhile ascent for the views alone. First inhabited in 990 AD, the château served as the military and administrative capital to the Viscount of Vallespir until 1321. Despite its elevated position, it was besieged several times, notably by the kings of Majorca and Aragón in 1285 and 1295. There’s a car park at the base of the village or up the hill behind the castle.
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING: CASTELNOU
 Chambre d’hôte/Crêperie la Figuera 3 Carrer de la Fond D’Avall   04 68 53 18 42,  la-figuera.com. In a truly idyllic spot at the base of the village with a gorgeous terrace cloaked with plants and flowers, and tables beneath rambling fig trees. The restaurant produces simple Catalan dishes and galettes from €8 or you can just stop by for a quick drink (Easter–Sept noon–2pm & 7–9pm; nonstop service at busier times). €75

The Côte Vermeille
The Côte Vermeille, where the Pyrenees meet the sea, is the last patch of French shoreline before Spain, its seaside villages once so remote that the Fauvist painters of the early 1900s hid out here. Mass tourism may have ended any sense of exclusivity but outside of high season there is solitude and peace among the wide empty beaches; interspersed between modern resorts like Port-Barcarès (north east of Perpignan), Canet Plage and Argèles-sur-Mer. The coastline remains sandy and straight almost until the border before being pushed east by the upsurging Pyrenean chain, where the prettier cove towns of Collioure and Banyuls are found.
Collioure
Some thirty kilometres southeast of Perpignan, COLLIOURE is achingly picturesque. Palm trees line the curving main beach of Port d’Avall, while slopes of vines and olives rise to ridges crowned with ruined forts and watchtowers. Its setting and monuments inspired Henri Matisse and André Derain to embark in 1905 on their explosive Fauvist colour experiments.
  Collioure is dominated by its twelfth-century Château-Royal (daily: 9am–5pm; July & Aug 10am–7pm; €4;  04 68 82 06 43), founded by the Templars and subject to later alterations by the kings of Mallorca and Aragón, and again after the Treaty of the Pyrenees gave Collioure to France. The mediocre permanent “collection” inside scarcely merits the entrance fee; attend instead a concert in the courtyard.
  The second landmark in the town is the Église Notre-Dame-des-Anges (daily: 9am–noon & 2–6pm; free;   04 68 82 06 43), which features in every postcard and tourist brochure of the region. With its belfry dating back to the middle ages, this building served as a beacon for the port until the late seventeenth century when the rest of the church was adjoined. Behind it two small beaches are divided by a causeway leading to the chapel of St-Vincent, built on a former islet, while west from here a concrete path follows the rocky shore to the bay of Le Racou.
  Just north of the château lies the old harbour, still home to a handful of brightly painted lateen-rigged fishing boats – now more likely used as pleasure craft – all that remains of Collioure’s traditional fleet. Beyond this, the stone houses and sloping lanes of the old Mouré quarter are the main focus of interest.
INFORMATION: COLLIOURE
Tourist office Place de 18-Juin (April–June & Sept 9am–noon & 2–7pm; July & Aug Mon–Sat 9am–8pm & Sun 10am–6pm; Oct–March Mon–Sat 9am–noon & 2–6pm;  04 68 82 15 47,  collioure.com).
ACCOMMODATION
 L’Arapede Rte de Port-Vendres  04 68 98 09 59,  arapede.com. This spacious, modern hotel fifteen minutes’ walk away from the centre of the town has ample parking (drivers should note that Collioure can be a parking nightmare) and a beautiful clifftop garden patio with pool. There’s also a mini beach five minutes away. Half-board is available for an extra €32pp. Closed mid-Nov to mid-Feb. €90
Caranques Rte de Port-Vendres  04 68 82 06 68,  les-caranques.com. With the best view in town, this clifftop hotel looks down to the sea and Collioure. There’s a private staircase down the cliffside to an area suitable for swimming. The rooms are slightly basic for the level of the hotel but the balcony outlook compensates. Breakfast €13. Closed Nov–March. €150
La Girelle Plage d’Ouille  04 68 81 25 56,  campinglagirelle.unblog.fr. Enviably positioned next to a nice little sandy beach, this mostly tent-only site, ten minutes’ walk from Collioure, offers a decent range of services including a snack-bar restaurant, grocery and fridge lockers. Three bed caravans can be rented by the week for €399 if you book well in advance. April–Sept. €30.50
Hostellerie des Templiers 12 av Camille-Pelletan  04 68 98 31 10,  hotel-templiers.com. The most central place to stay, this atmospheric hotel celebrates Collioure’s art heritage (Picasso frequented the bar downstairs) with paintings screening the bar and corridor walls. The hotel itself rambles into an annex that backs on to an occasionally noisy nightclub. Closed mid-Nov to Jan. €70
EATING
Le 5eme Péché 18 rue Fraternité  04 68 98 09 76,  le-cinquieme-peche.com. Collioure’s most innovative restaurant, and perhaps the only place in France creating Japanese-French fusion. Expect colourful platters combining the uncommon bedfellows of fruit and fish to the delight of any adventurous palate. Two-course menus cost €19. 12.15–1.45pm & 7.30–9pm; closed Sun & Wed eve plus all Mon.
Paco 18 rue Rière  04 68 82 90 91. There are a few tapas options in town but this is easily the best. Open year-round, there’s a convivial atmosphere that spills onto the narrow lane as locals and tourists effortlessly mingle with one another over generous platters of calamari, razor clams and cured hams. Tapas range from €3.50 to €7.50. 11am–3pm & 5.30pm–12.30am; closed Tues.
Banyuls-sur-Mer
South towards BANYULS-SUR-MER, 10km from Collioure, both the main highway and minor D914 wind through attractive vineyards, with the Albères hills rising steeply on the right. Make sure you sample the dark, full-bodied Banyuls dessert wine, an appellation that applies only to the vineyards of the Côte Vermeille. The town itself, facing a broad sweep of pebble beach, is pleasant but lacks the overt charm of Collioure.
  On the seafront avenue du Fontaulé, the Biodiversarium (April–June & Sept Wed–Sun 2–6pm; July–Aug 9.30am–12.30pm & 2–6pm; €5;  04 68 88 73 39,   biodiversarium.fr) aquarium, run by Sorbonne university’s marine biology department, has tanks containing a comprehensive collection of the region’s submarine life; this is protected in a nearby réserve marine, France’s best, which can be explored with local scuba outfitters.
  Four kilometres southwest of town in the Vallée de Roume, signposted from the top of avenue de Gaulle, is the Musée Maillol (temporarily closed for renovation;  04 68 88 57 11,  museemaillol.com), which is devoted to the works of sculptor Aristide Maillol (1861–1944), who was born near Banyuls. He is buried under his statue La Pensée in Banyuls.
INFORMATION: BANYULS-SUR-MER
Tourist office Diagonally opposite the mairie on the seafront (July & Aug 9am–7pm; Sept–June Mon–Sat 9am–noon & 2–6pm;  04 68 88 31 58,  banyuls-sur-mer.com).
ACCOMMODATION & EATING
Les Elmes At the eponymous sandy cove 1.5km north of town  04 58 88 03 12,  hotel-des-elmes.com or   restaurant-la-littorine.fr. Slap bang on the beachfront, this hotel has excellent facilities including a hot tub, sauna, terrace and an in-house restaurant (La Littorine) downstairs. The rooms are comfortable and well equipped but aim for the sea-view ones instead of the road outlook if you can afford extra. If you dine here, it may be a bit pricey, but you’re in for a treat; €32 buys you the three perfectly balanced, elegant-looking dishes from the gourmet menu. €88
Le Fanal Av de Fontaulé  04 68 98 65 88,  pascal-borrell.com. Classic French cuisine served alfresco on tables overlooking the marina. The service can be a little slow but it’s well worth the wait. The two course €19 menu might include a very fresh catch of the day and a mouthwatering chocolate millefeuille. Daily noon–2pm & 7–10pm; closed Sun, Mon & Wed eve.
Les Pieds dans l’Eau Rue des Elmes  06 27 34 81 66,  locations-vacances-banyuls.ch. A self-catering apartment complex ideal for couples and families. Right on the sandy beach and just far enough away from the main road, it’s an extremely relaxing spot. In high season there is a minimum stay period of one week. €500 per week
Vallée de Tech
The D115 winds its way through the beautiful Vallée de Tech starting at the border town, Le Boulou, then westwards through pretty little Céret, capital of the Vallespir region. Further upstream, the road passes through the dilapidated spa town, Amélie-les-Bains, and scruffy Arles-sur-Tech, whose only attraction is the sumptuous Abbaye de Ste-Marie. Just past Arles, the narrow Gorges de la Fou is well worth an outing, before you continue west to the captivating medieval walled town of Prats-de-Mollo, which is guarded by a menacing Vauban fortification.
GETTING AROUND: VALLÉE DE TECH
By bus Destinations to and from Perpignan along the Tech valley include Amélie-les-Bains (10 daily; 55min); Arles-sur-Tech (10 daily; 1hr); Céret (15 daily; 40min); and Prats-de-Mollo (2–3 daily; 1hr 40min).
Céret
Céret is a delightful place, with a wonderfully shady old town overhung by huge plane trees; the central streets are narrow and winding, opening onto small squares like plaça de Nou Reigs (“Nine Spouts” in Catalan), named after its central fountain; on avenue d’Espagne, two remnants of the medieval walls, the Porte de France and Porte d’Espagne, are visible. The town’s main sight, however, is the remarkable Musée d’Art Moderne (July to mid Sept 10am–7pm; mid-Sept to June 10am–6pm; mid-Oct to April closed Tues; €8;  04 68 87 27 76,  musee-ceret.com) at 8 bd Maréchal Joffre. Between about 1910 and 1935, Céret’s charms – coupled with the residence here of the Catalan artist and sculptor Manolo – drew a number of avant-garde artists to the town, including Matisse and Picasso, who personally dedicated a number of pictures to the museum. The holdings are too extensive to mount everything at once, but there are works on show by Chagall, Miró, Pignon, Picasso and Dufy, among others.
INFORMATION: CÉRET
Tourist office 1 av Clemenceau (June–Aug Mon–Sat 9am–1pm & 1.30–7pm, Sun 9am–1pm; Sept–May Mon–Sat 9am–12.30pm & 2–5pm;   04 68 87 00 53,  ceret.fr).
ACCOMMODATION & EATING
Restaurant La Fontaine Plaça de Nou Reigs  04 68 87 23 47. Few could resist dining in this beautiful, traffic-free marbled square shaded by vast plane trees. If you have a family, this is the perfect place for a relaxing meal while the kids dip hands in and out of the marbled fountain. The plat du jour costs €10. Noon–2.30pm & 7–10pm; closed Tues.
 Vidal 4 place Soutine  04 68 87 00 85,  hotelceret.com. A tastefully converted eighteenth-century episcopal palace within the old town walls, Vidal is now a charming and unpretentious hotel that has a decent restaurant, Del Bisbe, attached. Its first-floor terraced restaurant, shaded by vines, serves tasty, if not ground-breaking, regional dishes including lamb roasted with pistachios. The three-course menu costs €28. Noon–2pm & 7.30–9.30pm; closed Tues & Wed. Hotel and restaurant closed Nov. €50
Abbaye de Ste-Marie
Arles-sur-Tech • July & Aug 9am–7pm; Sept–June Mon–Sat 9am–noon & 2–6pm; also Sun April–Oct 2–5pm • €4 •  04 68 83 90 66
The Romanesque Abbaye de Ste-Marie, in Arles-sur-Tech, 14km from Céret, has Carolingian origins, thought to account for the back-to-front alignment of the altar at the west end and entrance at the east. Entry is via the pleasant thirteenth-century cloister. The unique and compelling feature of the massive church interior is a band of still vividly coloured twelfth-century frescoes high up in the apse of the eastern anti-chapel dedicated to St-Michel and which, appropriately, feature the archangel.
Gorges de la Fou
April–Nov daily 10am–6pm • €9.50 •  04 68 39 16 21
The world’s narrowest canyon, the Gorges de la Fou, spans a spectacular 2km cut through the southeastern flank of Pic du Canigou; at some parts the walls are only one metre apart. Aided by a metal catwalk, the ascent through the gorge is not overly arduous.
Prats-de-Mollo
Beyond the Gorges de la Fou, the D115 climbs steadily, between valley sides thick with walnut, oak and sweet chestnut, 19km to PRATS-DE-MOLLO, the end of the bus line. Prats is the last French town before the Spanish frontier, 13km beyond at Col d’Ares, but it has none of the usual malaise of border towns and is the most attractive place in the valley since Céret. Hub of the newer quarter is El Firal, the huge square used for markets since 1308 (it takes place on Fridays); the walled and gated ville haute just south makes for a wonderful wander, with its steep cobbled streets and a weathered church that has marvellous ironwork on the door. The old town’s walls were rebuilt in the seventeenth century after the suppression of a local revolt against onerous taxation imposed by Louis XIV on his new, post-Treaty Pyrenees holdings.
  Vauban’s fortress, the Fort Lagarde (guided visits: April–June & Sept–Oct Tues–Sun 2–6pm; July & Aug daily 10.30am–1pm, 3.30pm & 5–6.30pm; €3.50;  04 68 39 70 83; enquire about guided tours at the tourist office) sits on the heights above the town. It was built in 1677 as much to intimidate the local population as to keep the Spanish out.
INFORMATION: PRATS-DE-MOLLO
Tourist office Place le Fioral (April–Oct 9am–6pm; Nov–March Mon–Fri 10am–5pm;  04 68 39 70 83,  pratsdemollolapreste.com).
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING
Le Bellevue Rue el Firal  04 68 39 72 48,  hotel-le-bellevue.fr. Overlooking the place/Friday market, just outside the town wall, this appealing hotel offers private parking and rooms with balconies for a little extra. Its restaurant has seasonal menus from €20. Closed Dec to mid-Feb. €56
Hostellerie Le Relais 3 place Josep de la Trinxeria   04 68 39 71 30,  hotelrestaurantlerelais.com. Cheerful pastel-hued rooms and a south-facing garden restaurant serving an exciting range to suit all budgets including paella and Catalan meatballs, with two-course menus starting from €11. €51
Village Liberté Rte Col d’Arès, 100m south of the old town  04 68 39 72 78,  vvf-villages.com. A small family holiday village with petite studios, two-room apartments and leisure facilities including a nice pool. Advance booking essential. Easter–Oct. €100
Saint Marsal and around
The only direct route between the valleys of the Tech and the Têt, best covered by car or cycle, is the D618 from Amélie-les-Bains to Bouleternère. It’s 44 slow kilometres of mountain road, twisting through hillside meadows and magnificent oak forests, past isolated masies (Catalan farmsteads). Halfway there is the tiny village of Saint Marsal, which offers the first amenities en route and is well worth the stop.
Prieuré de Serrabona
Daily except major holidays 10am–6pm • €4 •  04 68 84 09 30
On the D84 just past Boule d’Amont, you’ll come across one of the finest examples – arguably the finest – of Roussillon Romanesque. The interior of the Prieuré de Serrabona (consecrated 1151) is starkly plain, making the beautifully carved column capitals of its rib-vaulted tribune even more striking: lions, centaurs, griffins and human figures with Asiatic faces and hairstyles – motifs brought back from the Crusades – executed in pink marble from Villefranche-de-Conflent, by students of the Maître d’Cabestany, if not himself.
The Têt valley
The upper Têt valley, known as the Pays de Conflent, is utterly dominated by the Pic du Canigou. The valley bottoms are lush with fields and orchards, but the vast and uncompromising mountain presides over all. As you continue upstream, the valley steepens and buckles as magnificent gorges carve in from the surrounding mountains and scalding water bleeds from the valley’s northern flank. Ancient shepherd villages, basking in Mediterranean glow, peer down on the road below. Crisscrossing the Têt, the vintage Train Jaune groans its way towards the Cerdagne plateau.
Prades (Prada) and around
The chief valley town is Prades, easily accessible by train and bus on the Perpignan–Villefranche–Latour-de-Carol route, and one obvious starting point for all excursions in the Canigou region. Although there are no great sights beyond the church of St-Pierre (free entry) in central place de la République, the town enjoys a status disproportionate to its size. This is largely thanks to Catalan cellist Pablo (Pau) Casals, who was a fierce opponent of the Franco regime in Spain, and consequently settled here as an exile. In 1950 he instituted the internationally renowned chamber music festival ( prades-festival-casals.com), held annually from late July to mid-August, the usual venue being the abbey of St-Michel-de-Cuixà.
  The thriving Tuesday morning market is not to be missed, with its produce strongly influenced by Catalan and north African culture; you’ll find paella, churros and fresh Moroccan spices, traded to the sounds of accordion buskers and congregations of elderly men chatting in French-Catalan dialect.
Abbaye St-Michel-de-Cuxà
May–Sept daily 9.30–11.50am & 2–6pm; Oct–April Mon–Sat 9.30–11.50am & 2–5pm • €5 •  04 68 96 15 35,  abbaye-cuxa.com
Three kilometres south of Prades stands one of the loveliest abbeys in France, the eleventh-century St-Michel-de-Cuxà. Although mutilated after the Revolution it is still beautiful, with its crenelated tower silhouetted against the wooded – sometimes snowy – slopes of Canigou. You enter via the labyrinthine, vaulted crypt, with its round central chamber, before proceeding to the church with its strange Visigothic-style “keyhole” arches. But the glory of the place is the cloister and its twelfth-century column capitals.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION: PRADES AND AROUND
By bus The bus depot is on av du Général-de-Gaulle on the east side of town.
Destinations Latour-de-Carol (2–3 daily; 1hr); Perpignan (approx. every half-hour; 55min).
By train The gare is two blocks south of the bus depot on bd de la Gare.
Destinations Perpignan (8 daily; 45min); Villefranche (8 daily; 10min).
Tourist office 10 place de la République (mid-Sept to mid-June Mon–Sat 9am–noon & 2–6pm; mid-June to mid-Sept 9am–6pm;   04 68 05 41 02,  prades-tourisme.fr).
ACCOMMODATION
 Castell Rose Chemin de la Litera  04 68 96 07 57,  castellrose-prades.com. Sumptuous chambres d’hôtes in a converted manor house with a pool and tennis court. Although just a short walk from the centre of Prades, it’s a very peaceful and secluded spot, thanks to the extensive grounds and the glorious views south to the Massif du Canigou. This outlook is also enjoyed from the homely bedrooms, particularly the ones with private balconies. €99
Chambre d’hôte Maison Prades 51 av du Général-de-Gaulle  04 68 05 74 27,  maisonprades.com. With its big bright rooms looking up to the Pic du Canigou and down to the sunny garden, this chambre d’hôte looks after its guests well. Breakfasts (included) are copious, delicious and healthy. €70
Le Grand Hôtel Molitg-les-Bains, 6km north of Prades  04 68 05 00 50,  grandhotelmolitg.com. If money is no object and you have transport, then this old and charmingly dishevelled spa hotel, beautifully set in a secluded valley next to a river, is a fine choice. Bathe in the hotel’s thermal waters, or more appealingly, the gentle flowing river below. The hotel’s gourmet restaurant has high standards and fairly high prices; a two-course meal costs €27. €115
L’Oasis Molitg-les-Bains, 6km north of Prades  04 68 05 00 92,  l-oasis-molitg-les-bains.fr. More down-to-earth than Le Grand Hôtel across the road, this budget option offers exceptional value with its basic, but clean rooms. €46
EATING
A number of appealing pavement café-restaurants ring the central place and while they offer a pleasant place to stop for a kir or two the food tends to be of poor quality.
 Restaurant Le Galie 3 av du Général-de-Gaulle  04 68 05 53 76,  gvillago.ovhsitebuilder.com. With its bold, flavourful and typically colourful Catalan-inspired dishes, you’ll forgive this small restaurant’s rather sombre atmosphere. For a light lunch, try the exquisite goat’s cheese and fig millefeuille or the prawn tempura, leaving room for their home-made éclair Paris. Menus start at €18 for two courses. Noon–3pm & 7.30–9.30pm; closed Tues eve plus all Mon & Wed.
Eus
The village of Eus, a five-minute drive northeast of Prades, claims to be the sunniest in France; it’s certainly one of the prettiest. Built among massive granite boulders that litter these elevated slopes, narrow cobbled lanes wind up to the ruined château and imposing eighteenth-century church of St Vincent. A number of easy hikes begin from the entrance to the village through the olive groves and gnarled green oak forests.
DRINKING
Des Gouts et des Couleurs Place de la Républic  06 09 53 32 47. No visit to Eus would be complete without visiting this convivial pavement bar occupying its own little place. Opening hours approximately mid-March to mid-Nov daily 11am–7pm.
Villefranche-de-Conflent
Some six kilometres up the Têt from Prades, the medieval garrison town of Villefranche-de-Conflent is dwarfed by sheer limestone escarpments, and is undoubtedly one of the most beautiful in France. Founded in 1092 by the counts of Cerdagne to block incursions from rivals in Roussillon, then remodelled by Vauban in the seventeenth century after annexation by France, its streets and fortifications have remained untouched by subsequent events. Worth a visit is St-Jacques church, with its primitively carved thirteenth-century baptismal font just inside the door; you can also walk the walls for €6 when the tourist office is open.
PETIT TRAIN JAUNE
One of the most spectacular train rides in the world, the Petit Train Jaune runs between Villefranche-de-Conflent and La Tour-de-Carol (with onward links towards Toulouse or Barcelona) in the upper Cerdagne, and is a wonder of early twentieth-century engineering. Built to link up the villages of the high Pyrenees with Perpignan, the antique narrow-gauge carriages now mostly carry tourists, cyclists and skiers. The most spectacular section of the route is in the upper Têt between Olette and Mont-Louis, where you’ll trundle over gorges and massive viaducts. The summertime frequency of the trains makes it practical to hop off and on, allowing you to explore the areas around smaller, isolated stations, many of them haltes facultatifs (ask to be set down). Outside summer, the timetable is somewhat unreliable, as the ageing train system needs regular maintenance.
Château-Fort Libéria
Daily: 10am–6pm; May & June 10am–7pm; July–Aug 9am–8pm • €10 or €7 if you fancy walking up •  fort-liberia.com
In 1681, Vauban constructed the Château-Fort Libéria on the heights above Villefranche-de-Conflent to protect it from “aerial” bombardment. Getting there involves taking the jeep, which leaves from near the town’s main gate; you can return to Villefranche by descending a subterranean stairway of a thousand steps, emerging at the end of rue St-Pierre.
St-Martin-du-Canigou
A 30min walk (no car access) above the hamlet of Casteil, itself eight kilometres south of Villefranche in the Vallée de Cady. French guided tours: Mon–Sat 10am, 11am, 2pm, 3pm, 4pm; plus June–Sept noon & 5pm; Sun/hols 10am & 12.30pm; closed Jan & Mon Oct–May • €6 •  stmartinducanigou.org
The stunning abbey of St-Martin-du-Canigou, founded in 1001, resurrected from ruins between 1902 and 1982, and now inhabited by a working religious community, occupies a narrow promontory of rock surrounded by chestnut and oak woods, while above it rises the precipitous slopes of the Pic du Canigou. Below, the ground drops vertically into the ravine of the Cady stream rushing down from the Col de Jou. What you see is a beautiful little garden and cloister overlooking the ravine, a low-ceiling, atmospheric chapel beneath the church, and the main church itself.
INFORMATION: VILLEFRANCHE-DE-CONFLENT
Tourist office 2 rue St Jean, by the western gate (Feb, Oct & Nov 10.30am–noon & 2–5pm; March–May 10.30am–5pm; June & Sept 10am–7pm; July & Aug 10am–8pm; Dec 2–5pm; closed Jan;  04 68 96 22 96,  villefranchedeconflent-tourisme.fr).
ACCOMMODATION
À l’Ombre du Fort 2 Sainte-Eulalie  04 68 97 10 01,  activityholidayfrance.com. A grand nineteenth-century house cloaked in Virginia creeper with spacious rooms and parquet flooring. Outside there’s a large, landscaped garden and sun-drenched swimming pool secluded by trees. Min stay 2 nights. Breakfast included. €85
Camping Les Cerisiers Chemin de la Pena, Vernet-les-Bains (6km south of Villefranche)  04 68 05 60 38,  camping-lescerisiers.com. Unlike other campsites in the area, this pleasant little site is peacefully tucked away from any kind of main road. It’s also well located for attempts to summit the Pic du Canigou. There are a few facilities here: sauna, hot tub, free wi-fi and little shop, while Vernet covers all other needs. Mid-March to mid-Oct. €20
EATING
 Boulangerie Patisserie Miras 13 rue Saint Jacques  04 68 96 37 06,  boulangerie.miras.free.fr. Run by a genuine artisan boulanger, this is the ideal place to sample the Bunyete, a Catalan speciality akin to a pancake-doughnut-cross (€2.50). This attractive little shop proudly bakes its breads and pastries in a 1930s cast iron, wood-fired oven. Tues–Sun 7am–1pm & 2–7pm; July & Aug daily 6.30am–8.30pm.
La Senyera 81 rue Saint Jean  04 68 96 17 65,  lasenyera.fr. This beautiful and atmospheric restaurant has the best reputation in town and is where the locals choose to dine. Dishes like the millefeuille de thon display a refreshingly sophisticated flair for a touristic hub like Villefranche, although there are a few gimmicks such as slates acting as plates. Budget around €20–30 for a generous meal. Noon–2pm & 7.30–9pm; Nov–March closed Wed lunch & eves except Sat eve; April–Oct closed Tues–Thurs eve; closed mid-Oct to mid-Nov & first week of July.
The upper Têt
Ten or so kilometres west of Villefranche, the mountains close in, dwarfing the valley and road below. As you turn right just past the village of Olette the road leads to the picture-perfect shepherd’s village of Evol, overlooked by the old fortress of the So Viscounts. Further up the Têt, most of the settlements are high on the mountainside, connected by ancient footpaths and dry-stone terraces, the most breathtaking of which is Canaveilles; from the main road it’s three kilometres of vertiginous single-track hairpins to reach this characterful old village. If you cross the main N166 road from the foot of Canaveilles and follow the well-trodden path to the river, you’ll see a stone basin with scalding thermal water pouring in from the mountainside with a makeshift sluice gate in the river for temperature adjustment. Some 3km further on the south side of the valley, the wild, wooded Gorges de la Carança (Thuès-Entre-Valls is the nearest village) cuts south through the mountains towards Spain.
  One trip worth making, particularly after a heavy day’s trekking, is to Les Bains de St-Thomas (daily 10am–7.40pm; July & Aug last admission 8.40pm; closed early June & Nov; €6.50;  04 68 97 03 13,  bains-saint-thomas.fr). Signposted from Fontpedrouse, 11km west of Olette, there are three open-air thermal pools here set at a pleasant 36–38°C, and located in a beautiful pine forest.
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING: UPPER TET VALLEY
There is a real dearth of accommodation options in this well-touristed area, except for holiday homes that usually rent by the week. Crucially there are no restaurants here either; the nearest are either back in Villefranche or up in Mont Louis.
La Fontaine In the centre of Olette  04 68 97 03 67,  atasteofcatalonia.co.uk. An excellent, English-run chambre d’hôte with five very tasteful rooms including a family suite. Breakfast is provided here but for all other meals in this town there is only a café across the road selling sandwiches. Closed Jan. €58
The Cerdagne
Twenty kilometres up from Olette, the Mediterranean climate slips away as the gradient flattens onto the wide, grassy Cerdagne plateau, whose once-powerful counts controlled lands from Barcelona to Roussillon. It’s a region that’s never been sure whether it is Spanish or French. After the French annexation of Roussillon, it was partitioned, with Spain retaining – as it still does – the enclave of Lliva. The Petit Train Jaune snakes laboriously across the entire plateau, though stations aren’t always convenient for the settlements they nominally serve.
Mont Louis
Easterly gateway to the region, the little garrison town of Mont Louis, built by Vauban in 1679–82, is France’s highest fortified town. The top citadelle is still a training school for paratroops and marines. Today the town is an attractive halfway station between the Mediterranean and Andorra, and has a few shops, bars and restaurants.
ACCOMMODATION AND EATING: MONT LOUIS
Chambre d’hôte La Volute 1 place d’Armes  06 21 58 01 80,  lavolute.wix.com/lavolute. Set in the seventeenth-century former governor’s mansion, with a garden atop a section of the ramparts overlooking the moat and mountains beyond. Minimum stay of one week outside of low season €110
Le Rucher de l’Ours 6 bd Vauban  04 68 04 11 26,  miel-lerucherdelours.fr. Welcoming little crêperie serving three courses for €16 under a stone-vaulted roof or outside in the often chilly wind. The restaurant is owned by a fantastic honey producer so be sure to stock up from the vast array of bee-related produce also sold here. Wed–Sun noon–2.30pm & 7–9pm; daily, with extended opening hours during school holidays.
Les Lacs des Bouillouses
The Têt ultimately has its source in the Carlit massif, which looms above the lovely Lacs des Bouillouses. This huge park in the high Pyrenees is strikingly beautiful; the sky is a different, purer kind of blue and the river and lake waters are clear and fresh. There are moderately difficult, circular hikes around the lakes that feed into the main reservoir as well as idyllic picnic beaches along the banks of the gentle river. Wild swimming in the summer months is a more than appealing prospect. To get here, turn north from Mont Louis and from there it’s well signposted.
< Back to The Pyrenees




Abbey de Fontfroide
Fontfroide, 15km southwest of Narbonne • Guided tours daily: April–June & Sept 10am–12.15pm & 1.45pm–5.30pm; July & Aug 10am–6pm; Oct 10am–12.15pm & 1.45–4.45pm; Nov–March 10am–noon & 2–4pm • €10.80 •  04 68 45 11 08,  fontfroide.com
A good side trip from Narbonne – just 15km southwest, but impossible without transport of your own – is the lovely Abbey de Fontfroide, which enjoys a beautiful location tucked into a fold in the dry cypress-clad hillsides. The extant buildings go back to the twelfth century, with some elegant seventeenth-century additions in the entrance and courtyards, and were in use from their foundation until 1900, first by Benedictines, then Cistercians. It was one of the Cistercian monks, Pierre de Castelnau, whose murder as papal legate sparked the notorious Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars in 1208.
  Visits to the restored abbey are only possible on a guided tour. Star features include the cloister, with its marble pillars and giant wisteria creepers, the church itself, some fine ironwork and a rose garden. The stained glass in the windows of the lay brothers’ dormitory consists of fragments from churches in north and eastern France damaged in World War I.


Carcassonne
Right on the main Toulouse–Montpellier train link, CARCASSONNE couldn’t be easier to reach. For anyone travelling through this region it is a must – one of the most dramatic, if also most-visited, towns in the whole of Languedoc. Carcassonne owes its division into two separate “towns” to the wars against the Cathars. Following Simon de Montfort’s capture of the town in 1209, its people tried in 1240 to restore their traditional ruling family, the Trencavels. In reprisal, King Louis IX expelled them from the Cité, only permitting their return on the condition that they built on the low ground by the River Aude – what would become the ville basse.
  A major summertime event worth catching is the Festival de Carcassonne from late June to mid-August, featuring world-class dance, theatre and music. The high point is the mammoth fireworks display on Bastille Day (July 14).

THE CANAL DU MIDI
The Canal du Midi runs for 240km from the River Garonne at Toulouse via Carcassonne to the Mediterranean at Agde. It was the brainchild of Pierre-Paul Riquet, a minor noble and tax collector, who succeeded in convincing Louis XIV (and more importantly, his first minister, Colbert) of the merits of linking the Atlantic and the Mediterranean via the Garonne.
  The work, begun in 1667, took fourteen years to complete, using tens of thousands of workers. The crux of the problem from the engineering point of view was how to feed the canal with water when its high point at Naurouze, west of Carcassonne, was 190m above sea level and 58m above the Garonne at Toulouse. Riquet responded by building a system of reservoirs in the Montagne Noire, channelling run-off from the heights down to Naurouze. He spent the whole of his fortune on the canal and, sadly, died just six months before its inauguration in 1681.
  The canal was a success and sparked a wave of prosperity along its course, with traffic increasing steadily until 1857, when the Sète–Bordeaux railway was opened, reducing trade on the canal to all but nothing. Today, the canal remains a marvel of engineering and beauty, incorporating no fewer than 99 locks (écluses) and 130 bridges, almost all of which date back to the first era of construction. The canal has, since its construction, been known for the lovely plane trees that line riverbank. Sadly, a wilt infection was discovered in 2006 and since then the trees have been systematically cut down. They will be replaced, however the view will not be the same for many years to come. You can follow the canal by road, and many sections have foot or bicycle paths, but the best way to see it is, of course, by boat. Outfits in all the major ports rent houseboats and barges, and there are many cruise options to choose from as well. Other sources of information include  canalmidi.com and   french-waterways.com, plus the tourist offices in Carcassonne and Toulouse.
Boat rental and cruises Le Boat ( 1 800 734 5491,  leboat.com or Locaboat (  03 86 91 72 72,   locaboat.com), both have a number of branches in Languedoc and the Midi.
Information Voies Navigables de France, 2 Port St-Étienne in Toulouse ( 05 61 36 24 24,  sudouest.vnf.fr); they also have English-speaking offices at the major canal ports.
Cité
To reach the Cité from the ville basse, take bus #2 from outside the station, or a navette from Square Gambetta. Alternatively, walk it in less than 30min, crossing the Pont-Vieux and climbing rue Barbacane, past the church of St-Gimer to the sturdy bastion of the Porte d’Aude (this is effectively the back entrance – the main gate is Porte Narbonnaise, on the east side)
The attractions of the well-preserved and lively ville basse notwithstanding, everybody comes to Carcassonne to see the Cité, the double-walled and turreted fortress that crowns the hill above the River Aude. From a distance it’s the epitome of the fairy-tale medieval town. Viollet-le-Duc rescued it from ruin in 1844, and his “too-perfect” restoration has been furiously debated ever since. It is, as you would expect, a real tourist trap. Yet, in spite of the chintzy cafés, craft shops and the crowds, you’d have to be a very stiff-necked purist not to be moved at all.

Château Comtal
1 rue Viollet-le-Duc • Daily: April–Sept 9.30am–6.30pm; Oct–March 9.30am–5pm; guided tours only, several in English • €8.50 •  04 68 11 70 70,  carcassonne.monuments-nationaux.fr
There is no charge for admission to the streets or the grassy lices – “lists” – between the walls, though cars are banned from 10am to 6pm. However, to see the inner fortress of the Château Comtal and walk the walls, you’ll have to join a guided tour. These assume some knowledge of French history, and point out the various phases in the construction of the fortifications, from Roman and Visigothic to Romanesque and the post-Cathar adaptations of the French kings.
St-Nazaire
Place St-Nazaire • Mon–Fri 8.45am–12.45pm & 1.45–5/6pm, Sat & Sun 8.45–10.30am & 2–5/6pm • Free •   04 68 10 24 30 •  carcassonne.org
Don’t miss the beautiful church of St-Nazaire, towards the southern corner of the Cité at the end of rue St-Louis. It’s a serene combination of nave with carved capitals in the Romanesque style and a Gothic choir and transepts, along with some of the loveliest stained glass in Languedoc. In the south transept is a tombstone believed to belong to Simon de Montfort. You can also climb the tower for spectacular views over the Cité.
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE: CARCASSONNE
By plane Carcassonne airport lies just west of the city ( 04 68 71 96 46,  aeroport-carcassonne.com). A navette (€5; hourly; 15min) leaves from outside the terminal and stops at the gare SNCF, square Gambetta and the Cité; a taxi to the centre will cost €8–15.
By train The gare SNCF is in the ville basse on the north bank of the Canal du Midi at the northern limits of the old town.
Destinations Arles (4–8 daily; 2hr 40min–3hr 30min); Béziers (22 daily; 45min–1hr 45min); Bordeaux (18–22 daily; 3hr 20min–4hr 30min); Limoux (16 daily; 25min); Marseille (12–18 daily; 3hr 20min–5hr 30min); Montpellier (18 daily; 1hr 30min–4hr); Narbonne (22 daily; 35min); Nîmes (26 daily; 2hr 5min–3hr 10min); Quillan (6 daily; 1hr 15min); Toulouse (22 daily; 45min–1hr).
By bus The gare routière ( carcassonne-agglo.fr) is a series of bus stops, with no actual building, located on bd de Varsovie on the northwest side of town, south of the canal.
INFORMATION
Tourist office 28 rue Verdun (April–June, Sept & Oct Mon–Sat 9.30am–6pm, Sun 10am–1pm; July & Aug 9.30am–7pm; Nov–March Mon–Sat 9.30am–12.30pm & 1.30–6pm;  04 68 10 24 30,   tourisme-carcassonne.fr). There’s also an annexe (April–Oct daily 9.30am–5/6/7pm; Nov–March Tues–Sun 9.30am–12.30pm & 1.30–5pm) just inside Porte Narbonnaise, the main gate to the Cité.
Discount pass If you are planning on visiting other medieval sites near Carcassonne (including the Cathar castles), you could buy the Passeport aux Sites du Pays Cathare (€2), which gives you a discounted admission price to many castles and monuments.
ACCOMMODATION
Auberge de Jeunesse Rue Trencavel  04 68 25 23 16,  fuaj.org; map. This modern, clean hostel, in the heart of the Cité, offers the cheapest accommodation in town and tends to get booked up well in advance. €24.50
Campsite la Cité Rte St-Hilaire  04 68 10 01 00,  campingcitecarcassonne.com; map. Tucked away amid parkland to the south of town, the local campsite can be reached by local bus (line #8) or on foot (about 20min) from the Cité. Closed mid-Oct to March. Minimum stay of one week in July & Aug. €28
 De la Cité Place Auguste-Pierre Pont  04 68 71 98 71,  hoteldelacite.com; map. Carcassonne’s luxury option, with prices to match, with rooms and suites in an opulent medieval manor house, a heated swimming pool and stunning views from the battlemented walls. €425
Le Donjon 2 rue Comte-Roger  04 68 11 23 00,  hotel-donjon.fr; map. A shade less luxurious than the Cité and a good deal less expensive, this hotel offers four-star amenities in a medieval building near the castle. The rooms are spacious and airy. €165.
Espace Cité 132 rue Trivalle  04 68 25 24 24,  hotelespacecite.fr; map. Just outside the main gate of the Cité, and offering Carcassonne’s best value for money – excellent location, en-suite rooms, mod cons and efficient service at reasonable prices. Rates include an all-you-can-eat breakfast buffet. €106
Du Soleil Le Terminus 2 av de Maréchal-Joffre  04 68 25 25 00,  soleilvacances.com; map. A station-side hotel of decaying steam-age luxury, with a splendid fin-de-siècle facade. There is also a fitness centre with a pool, sauna, and hot tub, and bike rental is available. €137
EATING
Auberge de Dame Carcas 3 place du Château  04 68 71 23 23,  damecarcas.com; map. A traditional bistro offering cassoulet and other regional dishes. Menus €16.50–28. Daily: July & Aug noon–2pm & 7–10pm; Sept–June noon–2pm & 7–9.30pm.
 L’Écurie 43 bd Barbès  04 68 72 04 04,  restaurant-lecurie.fr; map. Sophisticated local cuisine including some splendid fish dishes; try the pareillade de poissons – five varieties of seafood – or if that’s a little daunting, you can sample the excellent lobster with lentils, as a starter. They also do a very good casssoulet. Menus €28–35. Mon–Sat noon–1.30pm & 7–9.30pm, Sun noon–1.30pm.
Robert Rodriguez 39 rue Coste Reboulh  04 68 47 37 80,  web.lesrelaisinternet.com; map. Carcassonne’s most flamboyantly experimental restaurant combines local, fresh ingredients in inventive permutations. What’s on offer changes according to season and the chef’s inclinations, with menus at €45–80. Mon, Tues & Thurs–Sat noon–2.30pm & 7–9.30pm; Wed noon–2.30pm.


Châteaux de Lastours
16km north of Carcassonne • Feb, March, Nov & Dec Sat, Sun & hols 10am–5pm; April–June & Sept daily 10am–6pm; July & Aug daily 9am–8pm; Oct daily 10am–5pm • €6 •  04 68 77 56 02,  les4chateaux-lastours.lwdsoftware.net
The most memorable site in the Montaigne Noire is the Châteaux de Lastours, the most northerly of the Cathar castles. There are, in fact, four castles here – their ruined keeps jutting superbly from a sharp ridge of scrub and cypress that plunges to rivers on both sides. The two oldest, Cabaret (mid-eleventh century) and Surdespine (1153), fell into de Montfort’s hands in 1211, after their lords had given shelter to the Cathars. The other two, Tour Régine and Quertinheux, were added after 1240, when the site became royal property, and a garrison was maintained here as late as the Revolution. A path winds up from the roadside, bright in early summer with iris, cistus, broom and numerous other plants.



=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================



Narbonne
POP 51,306
The picturesque Canal de la Robine runs right through the centre of elegant Narbonne and connects the Étang de Bages-Sigean with the Canal du Midi. These days it's a charming midsize Languedoc market town, but wind the clock back two millennia and you’d be in a major Roman city: the capital of the province of Gallia Narbonensis. Exceptional sights include its cathedral and former archbishops' palace, and the town is now a popular stop-off for boaters.
1Sights
Palais des ArchevêquesPALACE
(Archbishops' Palace; GOOGLE MAP ; place de l'Hôtel de Ville; all museums €9, single museum €4; h10am-6pm Jun-Sep, 10am-noon & 2-5pm Wed-Mon Oct-May)
The former archbishops’ palace houses several archaeological museums. Roman mosaics and stucco paintings are on display at the Musée d’Art et d’Histoire and Musée Archéologique, along with an underground gallery of Gallo-Roman shops in the Horreum, and a collection of impressive Roman masonry in the Musée Lapidaire.
Cathédrale St-JustCATHEDRAL
( GOOGLE MAP ; entry on rue Armand Gauthier; h9am-noon & 2-6pm)
Narbonne’s most distinctive landmark is actually only half-finished: construction was halted in the 14th century, and only the towers and choir reached final completion. Its treasury has a beautiful Flemish tapestry of the Creation, while grotesque gargoyles leer down upon the 16th-century cloister.
WORTH A TRIP
NARBONNE DAY TRIPPER

Abbaye de FontfroideMONASTERY
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 45 11 08; www.fontfroide.com; chemin de Fontfroide; adult/child abbey, garden & museum €19/15, abbey & gardens only €11/7; h9.30am-7pm Jul & Aug, 11am-6pm Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct, 10am-12.30pm & 1.30-5pm Nov-Mar)
Founded by Cistercian monks in 1093, Fontfroide Abbey became one of southern France’s most powerful ecclesiastical centres during the Middle Ages. Heavily damaged during the Revolution, it was purchased in 1908 by the French painter Gustave Fayet and his wife, Madeleine, who restored much of the building. Highlights include the tranquil chapter hall, refectory and monks’ dormitory, as well as a rose garden added during the 18th century. It's 15km southwest of Narbonne via the D613. Cash payment only.
Fontfroide also produces its own renowned wine, which you can sample in the on-site wine shop or, better still, in the vaulted restaurant, La Table de Fontfroide ( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 41 02 26; www.fontfroide.com; chemin de Fontfroide; 2-/3-course lunch menus €21/25, 3-/4-course dinner menus €35/39; hnoon-2pm & 7-9.30pm Tue-Sat, noon-2pm Sun & Mon Jul & Aug, noon-2pm daily mid-Feb–Jun & Sep-late Dec).
Réserve Africaine de SigeanWILDLIFE RESERVE
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.reserveafricainesigean.fr; 19 chemin Hameau du Lac; adult/child €32/23; h9am-6.30pm Easter-early Sep, shorter hours rest of year)
Opened in 1974, this excellent 300-hectare wildlife reserve aims to recreate the atmosphere of the African savannah – a climate not all that different from the Languedoc’s dry and dusty plains. Lions, white rhinos, warthogs, giraffes and zebras are just a few of the 160 species on show, with some 3800 animals here in all. Some areas are drive-through, while others you explore on foot. The reserve is off the A9, 17km south of Narbonne.
2Activities
In the heart of Narbonne, Les Petits Bateaux du Canal ( GOOGLE MAP ; %06 15 65 12 51; 32 cours de la République; 5-/7-seater boat rental per hour €29/33, each additional hour €20/25; h10am-7pm late Mar–mid-Oct) rents electric boats to explore the waterways under your own steam. No boat licence is required; life jackets are provided.
For a spin along the towpaths, Mellow Vélos ( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 43 38 21; www.mellowvelos.com; rte Neuve, Paraza; adult/child per day from €20/10, per week €86/43; h8am-7pm Fri-Wed) rents bikes. It's located in Paraza, 20km northwest of Narbonne, off the D124, and will deliver bikes to your door (free within a 10km radius, or anywhere in Bas-Languedoc for a small charge). Electric bikes are also available. Cash only.
4Sleeping & Eating
Will’s HotelHOTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 90 44 50; www.willshotel-narbonne.com; 23 av Pierre Semard; s/d/q €61/69/99; aW)
Once a merchant’s house dating from 1860, this basic corner hotel just 150m from the train station is a decent base for overnighting in Narbonne. Some of the rooms are shoebox-sized, however, so insist on a ‘Double Confort’ room. There's a bike garage; parking is available at a nearby municipal car park.
Demeure de RoquelongueB&B€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 45 63 57; www.demeure-de-roquelongue.com; 53 av de Narbonne, St-André-de-Roquelongue; d €110-135, f €200; pWs)
In the village of St-André-de-Roquelongue, 19km southwest of Narbonne, this maison vigneronne (winemakers’ house) dating from 1870 makes a beautiful base, with five royally decorated rooms. Cers has its original fireplace and garden view, Espan a vintage bathtub screened by curtains, and family-friendly Eole has two connecting bedrooms sleeping up to five, and its own lounge area and patio.
oÀ La Table du MarchéMODERN FRENCH€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 43 19 27; 8 rue Émile Zola; 2-/3-course menus €24/29, mains €18-26; hnoon-2pm & 7.30-10pm Wed-Sun)
Inspired flavour combinations on the daily-changing menu, sourced from Les Halles directly opposite, might include duck with truffled polenta, merlot-braised beef cheeks with lentils and heirloom carrots, and lemon sole with asparagus and saffron risotto, but the showstoppers are desserts like dark-chocolate ganache with raspberry sauce and hazelnut meringue or bourbon-vanilla-marinated pineapple crumble with chestnut ice cream.
DON'T MISS
TO MARKET, TO MARKET

Les HallesMARKET
( GOOGLE MAP ; www.narbonne.halles.fr; 1 cours Mirabeau; h7am-1pm)
Narbonne’s covered market is one of the most beautiful in France. Built at the turn of the 20th century, it’s a masterpiece of art nouveau style, with panels of frosted glass, decorative stonework and a wonderful cast-iron roof. Inside, over 70 stalls sell cheese, charcuterie, poultry, meat and fish as well as fruit, flowers and wine.
8Information
Tourist Office ( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 65 15 60; www.narbonne-tourisme.com; 31 rue Jean Jaurès; h9am-7pm Apr–mid-Sep, 10am-12.30pm & 1.30-6pm Mon-Sat, 9am-1pm Sun mid-Sep–Mar) Can advise on canal cruises and water sports on the nearby Étang de Bages-Sigean lagoon.
8Getting There & Away
Frequent trains serve Narbonne en route from Béziers (€6.10, 15 minutes), Montpellier (€15, one hour) and Perpignan (€15.50, one hour).
WORTH A TRIP
MICHELIN-STAR SUPPERS

If you’re looking for a once-in-a-lifetime meal, two chefs tucked away in the countryside have won the hallowed three Michelin stars. Both also have accommodation.
Bras (%05 65 51 18 20; www.bras.fr; Laguiole; menus €140-220, mains €45-90; h7-9.30pm Tue & Wed, 11.30am-1.30pm & 7-9.30pm Thu-Sun early Apr-Nov, closed Dec-early Apr; W) Michel Bras has been based at the eponymous Bras in the village of Laguiole since 1999. His food is steeped in the rustic, country flavours of his youth, reinvented in all kinds of outlandish ways. It’s worth a trip for the restaurant alone: a modernist, plate-glass marvel, with views over Aubrac’s green hills. Double rooms start at €310. Unusually for a superstar chef, Michel Bras is self-made: he’s never strayed from his home on the Aubrac plateau, between the Massif Central and the Cévennes, and he learned many of his skills from his mother. He’s now handed over the reins to his son, Sébastien, but still makes regular appearances.
Auberge du Vieux Puits (%04 68 44 07 37; www.aubergeduvieuxpuits.fr; Fontjoncouse; menus €110-190; hnoon-1.30pm & 8-9.30pm Wed-Sat, noon-1.30pm Sun Mar-Dec, closed Jan & Feb; c) Gilles Goujon’s wonderfully relaxed Auberge du Vieux Puits is tucked away in the hilltop village of Fontjoncouse, between Narbonne and Perpignan. Goujon’s known for his fondness for humble ingredients such as Bigorre pork, woodcock, hare, boar and pigeon. The menus stretch between four and seven courses and include a ‘chariot of cheese’ that defies belief. Double rooms start at €165.
Carcassonne
POP 49,400
Perched on a rocky hilltop and bristling with zigzag battlements, stout walls and spiky turrets, the fortified city of Carcassonne looks like something out of a children’s storybook when it's seen from afar. A Unesco World Heritage Site since 1997, it’s most people’s idea of the perfect medieval castle.
La Cité, as the old walled town is now known, attracts over four million visitors every year, peaking in high summer. Time your visit for late in the day (or better still for spring and autumn) to truly appreciate the old town's medieval charm.
Sights
Beneath Carcassonne’s fortified castle La Cité, on the left bank of the Aude River, is the city’s second half, Ville Basse. It’s a mostly modern town that conceals a medieval heart: the Bastide St-Louis, which was built during the 13th century using the characteristic grid of streets set around a central square, place Carnot.
The lower town was later redeveloped during the 18th and 19th centuries, and is home to several impressive hôtels particuliers (private mansions) and religious buildings, as well as Carcassonne’s marvellous covered market, dating from 1768.
oLa CitéAREA
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; enter via Porte Narbonnaise or Porte d'Aude; h24hr)
Built on a steep spur of rock, Carcassonne’s rampart-ringed fortress dates back over two millennia. The fortified town is encircled by two sets of battlements and 52 stone towers, topped by distinctive ‘witch’s hat’ roofs (added by architect Viollet-le-Duc during 19th-century restorations). A drawbridge can still be seen in the main gate of Porte Narbonnaise ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ), which leads into the citadel’s interior, a maze of cobbled lanes and courtyards, now mostly lined by shops and restaurants.
The hill on which La Cité stands has been fortified many times across the centuries – by Gauls, Romans, Visigoths, Moors, Franks and Cathars, to name a few. Following the annexation of Roussillon by France in 1659, the castle’s usefulness as a frontier fortress declined and it slowly crumbled into disrepair, but it was saved from destruction by Viollet-le-Duc, who left his mark on many of France’s medieval landmarks, including Notre Dame in Paris and Vézelay in Burgundy.
The castle is laid out in a concentric pattern, with the double wall and defensive towers designed to resist attack from siege engines. The castle’s second gate, Porte d'Aude ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ), was partly destroyed in 1816 and no longer has its drawbridge.
In between the walls, an interior space known as Les Lices runs for just over 1km around the castle. Though designed as a defensive space to delay would-be attackers, during the medieval era the city’s poorest residents would have built a shanty-town of houses and workshops here, which were cleared out during Viollet-le-Duc’s restorations. It’s now the best place to escape the crowds and properly appreciate the castle’s martial architecture.
To actually walk on the ramparts, you have to pay to enter the Château Comtal ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; place du Château, La Cité; adult/child €8.50/free; h10am-6.30pm Apr-Sep, 9.30am-5pm Oct-Mar), a keep built for the viscounts of Carcassonne during the 12th century. Admission includes access to the keep’s rooms and a section of the battlements, with fabulous views over the surrounding countryside and the distant Pyrenees. Guided tours in several languages are available in summer; check with the tourist office for schedules. It's free on the 1st Sunday of the month from November to March.
Before you leave, visit the lovely Basilique St-Nazaire ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; place St-Nazaire, La Cité; h9am-7pm Jul & Aug, to 6pm Sep-Jun) next to place du Château, notable for its Gothic transept and vivid rose windows. Often, traditional plain chant can be heard inside.
Pont-VieuxBRIDGE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP )
Though it’s only one of several bridges spanning the Aude River, the Pont-Vieux is by far the oldest and prettiest. It was built during the 14th century to provide a quick link between Carcassonne’s lower and upper towns, and rebuilt in the 19th century. It’s one of the few surviving medieval bridges in France, prized for its graceful arches and compact dimensions, and is only open to pedestrians.
2Activities
When you've had your fill of architecture, take a canal cruise, go cycling or sample the local wines.
Boat Tours
Several companies offer cruises along the Canal du Midi, also a Unesco-listed wonder, providing a beautiful way to appreciate Carcassonne's architecture from afar surrounded by gorgeous countryside.
The main operators are Carcassonne Croisières ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %06 80 47 54 33; www.carcassonne-navigationcroisieres.com; Port de Plaisance; 1¼-hr cruise adult/child €8.50/6.50; h10.30am & 2pm Jul & Aug, 10.30am & 2.30pm Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct) and Le Cocagne ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %06 50 40 78 50; www.bateau-cocagne-canal-carcassonne.fr; Port de Plaisance; 1¼-hr cruise adult/child €8/6; h2pm & 6pm daily Jul & Aug, 2pm & 6pm Wed-Mon Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct). Standard cruises last around 1¼ hours, but there are longer trips available. All trips leave from the Port de Plaisance in the Ville Basse.
Wine Tasting
Experienced English-speaking company Vin en Vacances ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %06 42 33 34 09; www.vinenvacances.com; 10 rue du Pont Vieux; day tours €125-145) runs scheduled minibus tours of local vineyards from Carcassonne.
In town, most of the wines at cellar/wine-tasting establishment Vins & Vinos ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 10 97 04; www.vinsvinos.com; 38 rue Barbès; tastings from €15; h10am-6pm Tue-Fri, 9.30am-5pm Sat) come from the south of France but especially the Languedoc-Roussillon and Toulouse areas. Learn more about the terroirs and meet the winemakers during tastings and other events; check the program online.
4Sleeping
Sleeping inside the old city may seem romantic, but you might think twice once you’ve lugged your bags through the alleyways. As vehicles are banned, if you're driving you'll have to leave your car outside the city walls overnight. Staying outside the walled city is more practical (and invariably cheaper).
Auberge de JeunesseHOSTEL€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 25 23 16; www.hifrance.org; rue du Vicomte Trencavel, La Cité; dm incl breakfast €25; hclosed mid-Dec–Jan & weekends Feb; iW)
This HI hostel is smack bang in the centre of La Cité – great for atmosphere, not great if you’re arriving at the train station 4km downhill to the northwest. Facilities include four- to six-bed dorms, a spacious kitchen, an outside terrace and bike rental. It’s very popular, so book well ahead.
Hôtel AstoriaHOTEL€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 25 31 38; www.astoriacarcassonne.com; 18 rue Tourtel; d €39-77, tr €65-89, q €81-99, 5-person r €91-115; paW)
It’s not going to win any style awards, but this 22-room budget hotel is great value for Carcassonne. Rooms are small and bathrooms are basic, but it's just 500m east of the train station, and the private parking (€5 outside, €8 under cover) is a bonus. Bike rental is available for €10 per day.
La Maison VieilleB&B€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %06 23 40 65 34; www.la-maison-vieille.com; 8 rue Trivalle; d €90-95, f €105-125; W)
As charming a B&B as you’ll find in Carcassonne, this old mansion's beautiful rooms include Barbacane in blues, Cité with exposed brick, Prince Noir with an in-room bath, and vintage-furnished Dame Carcas. Filled with fig trees, olive trees and lavender, its walled courtyard is idyllic for breakfast. It's handy for the walled city and Ville Basse; families are warmly welcomed.
oHôtel de la CitéHISTORIC HOTEL€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 71 98 71; www.hoteldelacite.fr; place Auguste-Pierre-Pont, La Cité; s/d/f from €230/270/350; aWs)
Built in the 19th century in the Gothic Revival style, this is Carcassonne's most magnificent place to stay. Palatial rooms are individually appointed, many with wood panelling and/or timber beams, and some have panoramic private terraces. Floor-to-ceiling bookshelves line the private library, which has its own bar, and there's a topiary-flanked swimming pool. Its Michelin-starred restaurant, La Barbacane, is sublime.
Eating
Restaurants in La Cité tend to be touristy; you’ll find more authentic fare at better value in the Ville Basse.
On menus you’ll often see cassoulet – a stew of vegetables, white beans and meat that is said to have been invented in the nearby village of Castelnaudry. Quality varies, so be choosy about where you try it.
Markets take place in Ville Basse on place Carnot on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday mornings.
Les HallesMARKET€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; place Eggenfelden; h7.30am-1.30pm Tue-Sat)
Carcassonne’s beautiful stone-columned covered market, dating from 1768, sells local wines, cheeses, shellfish and produce.
L’ArtichautBISTRO€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %09 52 15 65 14; 14 place Carnot; mains €12-22; hnoon-2pm Mon-Wed, noon-2pm & 7-9.30pm Thu-Sat; c)
This lively local hang-out is full of office workers at lunchtime, so you know you’re in good hands. It’s great for no-fuss bistro standards, such as roast Camembert, classic steak-frites and tapas platters, and the location on place Carnot is a winner. The children's menu offers petite versions of main dishes.
La MarquièreBISTRO€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 71 52 00; www.lamarquiere.com; 13 rue St-Jean, La Cité; 2-/3-course menus €32/44; hnoon-2.30pm & 7-10.30pm Fri-Tue)
In an old shuttered auberge (country inn), complete with beams and original hearth, this family-run bistro serves meaty cassoulet, along with Mediterranean-influenced dishes such as lamb with parsnip gnocchi, foie gras ravioli, aubergine and spinach cannelloni, and sea bass with squid-ink spaghetti. Ask for a table in the courtyard if it’s sunny.
Au Comte RogerMODERN FRENCH€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 11 93 40; www.comteroger.com; 14 rue St-Louis, La Cité; 2-/3-course lunch menus €24/30, 3-course dinner menu €41, mains €20-32; hnoon-1.30pm & 7-9.30pm Tue-Sat)
The citadel location bumps up the prices considerably, but this is one of the better establishments for traditional cassoulet. The restaurant's smart dining room has cream-coloured chairs and tables and polished wooden floors, but the best seats are in the vine-draped courtyard beside an old well.
Bloc GBISTRO€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 47 58 20; www.bloc-g.com; 112 rue Barbacane; 3-course lunch menu €15, dinner mains €15-25; hnoon-2.30pm Tue, noon-2.30pm & 7-10.30pm Wed-Sat)
A modern dining space of white walls, white chairs and white tables is reflected in the short lunch menu of salads and tartes salées (savoury tarts), and creative versions of southwestern French classics such as l'ouillade (hearty soup made from pig's trotters, cabbage and turnips) of an evening, along with great local wines by the glass. Also has guest rooms (doubles €10).
Chez FredBISTRO€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 72 02 23; www.chez-fred.fr; 31 bd Omer Sarraut; 2-/3-course menus lunch €15/22, dinner €22/28, mains €16-22; hnoon-1.45pm & 7-9.45pm Tue-Fri, 7-9.45pm Sat-Mon Jul & Aug, closed Sun & Mon Sep-Jun; c)
Accessed via antique gates, Fred’s Place is a relaxed bistro set around a courtyard. Tuck into sensational cassoulet or adventurous dishes such as plum-marinated pork, pumpkin risotto or roast chicken with olive tapenade. Kids get a pared-down version of adults' cuisine on the children's menu.
oLa BarbacaneGASTRONOMY€€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 71 98 71; www.hoteldelacite.fr; place Auguste-Pierre-Pont, La Cité; 3-course lunch menu €38, 6-course dinner menu €85, mains €40-60; h12.30-2pm & 7.30-9.30pm)
Carcassonne's finest dining is inside the Hôtel de la Cité at chef Jérôme Ryon's Michelin-starred premises. Opulent carved woodwork and stained glass set the stage for unforgettable dishes utilising some of France's finest produce: poached Bouzigues oysters with preserved lemon; Charolais beef with potato churros and Perigord sauce; and Languedoc-grown saffron, white asparagus and black-garlic risotto with Cévennes goat's cheese.
8Information
La Cité Tourist Office ( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 10 24 30; www.tourisme-carcassonne.fr; Porte Narbonnaise, La Cité; h9.30-7.30pm Jul & Aug, 9.30am-6.30pm Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct, 9.30am-1pm & 1.30-5.30pm Tue-Sun Nov-Mar)
Ville Basse Tourist Office ( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 10 24 30; www.tourisme-carcassonne.fr; 28 rue de Verdun; h9.30am-7.30pm Jul & Aug, 9.30am-6.30pm Mon-Sat, 10am-1pm Sun Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct, 9.30am-5.30pm Mon-Sat Nov-Mar)
8Getting There & Away
AIR
Carcassonne Airport (CCF; GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 71 96 46; www.aeroport-carcassonne.com) Carcassonne’s airport, 5.5km west of town, is used by a handful of carriers, currently Ryanair, Iberia and Atlas Atlantic. It serves several UK cities, including London Stansted, plus Cork, Dublin, Brussels and Porto.
TRAIN
Carcassonne is on the main line from Toulouse. Buses are geared to school timetables, so it’s much easier and quicker to catch a train.
AMontpellier €26, 1½ hours, up to three hourly
ANarbonne €11.50, 30 minutes, up to three hourly
APerpignan €21.20, two hours; change in Narbonne, up to three hourly
AToulouse €16, 50 minutes, up to three hourly
8Getting There & Away
TO/FROM THE AIRPORT
The Navette Aéroport runs to and from the airport (€5, 25 minutes), leaving the train station hourly April to October; from November to March it only serves arriving and departing flights.
BUS
In July and August there’s a little tourist-train shuttle (on wheels) between the Ville Basse and the old city every 10 minutes; a one-way ticket is €2, while a day-return ticket is €3.
At other times of year, Agglo (www.carcassonne-agglo.fr) bus 4 runs every 30 minutes Monday to Saturday, hourly on Sunday, from the train station to La Cité’s main entrance at Porte Narbonnaise. Journey time is 10 minutes. A single ticket costs €1; a day ticket is €2.60.


Perpignan
POP 123,000
Framed by the peaks of the Pyrenees 13km west of the Mediterranean coastline and just 38km north of the Spanish border, Perpignan radiates out from the tight knot of the old town's warren of alleys, palm-shaded squares and shabby tenements painted in shades of lemon, peach and tangerine.
Historically, Perpignan (Perpinyà in Catalan) was capital of the kingdom of Mallorca, a Mediterranean power that stretched northwards as far as Montpellier and included all the Balearic Islands; the Mallorcan kings’ palace still stands guard at the southern end of the old town.
Its proximity to Spain means the town is strong on fiestas.



1Sights
Perpignan’s old town is roughly contained within the main ring roads of bd des Pyrénees in the west, bd Thomas Wilson in the north, bd Anatole France in the east, and bd Henri Poincaré in the south. Its shallow canal skirts its western edge.
Cars are banned in the centre, so if you’re driving you’ll have to park in one of the large municipal car parks on the edges of the old town.
oPalais des Rois de MajorquePALACE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 34 96 26; www.ledepartment66.fr; 4 rue des Archers; adult/child €4/2; h10am-6pm Jun-Sep, 9am-5pm Oct-May)
Perpignan’s most dominant monument, the Palace of the Kings of Mallorca sprawls over a huge area to the south of the old town. Built in 1276, the castle was later refortified with massive red-brick walls by Louis XIV's military engineer, Vauban. These days the star-shaped citadel is sparsely furnished, but its great battlements and strategic defences still give a sense of the Mallorcan kings’ might. Views from the ramparts stretch over Perpignan’s terracotta rooftops to the coast.
Le Castillet & Casa PaïralGATE, MUSEUM
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; place de Verdun; adult/child €2/free; h10am-6.30pm Tue-Sun)
Like many medieval towns, Perpignan was once encircled by defensive walls. Today all that remains is the red-brick town gate of Le Castillet, at the northern end of the old town. Inside the gateway is the Casa Païral museum, displaying Catalan ephemera from traditional bonnets and lace mantillas to an entire 17th-century kitchen.
Cathédrale St-JeanCATHEDRAL
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; place Gambetta; h8am-7pm Mon-Fri, 10.30am-6.30pm Sat & Sun Jun-Sep, 8am-6pm Mon-Fri, 11am-5.30pm Sat & Sun Oct-May)
Perpignan’s old town has several intriguing churches, but the most impressive is the Cathédrale St-Jean, begun in 1324 and not completed until 1509. Topped by a Provençal wrought-iron bell cage, the cathedral has a flat façade of red brick and smooth, zigzagging river stones.
Inside, the fine carving and ornate altarpiece are characteristically Catalan, and the simple statue of the Virgin and child in the north aisle is a venerated relic.
WORTH A TRIP
PREHISTORIC DAY OUT

Musée de Préhistoire de TautavelMUSEUM
(Tautavel Prehistory Museum; GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 29 07 76; www.450000ans.com; av Jean Jaurès, Tautavel; adult/child incl audioguide €8/4; h10am-7pm Jul & Aug, 10am-12.30pm & 2-6pm Sep-Jun)
The cave-riddled cliffs above Tautavel, 34km northwest of Perpignan along the D117, have yielded a host of prehistoric finds, most notably a human skull unearthed in the Arago Cave that's estimated to be 450,000 years old (one of Europe's oldest such discoveries). The fascinating museum here delves into the area’s prehistoric past, with a full-size cave reproduction, displays of fossilised bones and tools, and multimedia exhibits. Admission includes a secondary exhibition at Musée des Premiers Habitants d'Europe, 500m southeast.
There's no public transport, so you'll need your own wheels.
zFestivals & Events
Fête de la Sant JoanCULTURAL
(hmid-Jun)
A sacred flame that's maintained all year at the town gate of Le Castillet is taken to the top of Mont Canigou for a Midsummer bonfire. Afterwards, the flame is brought back to Le Castillet, where fireworks are set off and children light lanterns.
Nuit et Fête du Vin PrimeurWINE
(hOct)
On the third Thursday in October, a barrel of the year’s new wine production is ceremonially paraded through the streets to Cathédrale St-Jean to be blessed. Wine tasting (accompanied by local charcuterie) later takes place all over the city, along with samba, jazz and blues performances.
4Sleeping
Hôtel de la LogeHOTEL€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 34 41 02; www.hoteldelaloge.com; 1 rue des Fabriques Nabot; s/d from €63/78; aW)
The best option inside the old town is this 22-room former merchant's house footsteps from the Castillet tower. It now feels like an upmarket antique shop: its staircase and hallways are filled with Catalan furniture and quirky objets d’art and rooms are furnished in old-fashioned style. Rooms 106 and 206 overlook place de la Loge.
Auberge de JeunesseHOSTEL€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 34 63 32; www.hifrance.org; 3 allée Marc Pierre; dm/tw/q incl breakfast €19.30/42.60/77.20; hreception 8-11am & 5-9pm mid-Apr–mid-Oct, hostel closed mid-Oct–mid-Apr; aW)
Built in hacienda style, with a central courtyard that's ideal for summer-night barbecues, and interior and exterior arches, Perpignan’s modern, well-run HI-affiliated hostel has a handy location just north of Parc de la Pépinière 300m west of the bus station. Single-sex dorms are spartan but well kept; private rooms have showers (but not toilets) and there's a self-catering kitchen.
oNyxBOUTIQUE HOTEL€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 34 87 48; www.nyxhotel.fr; 62bis av Général de Gaulle; s/d/f from €89/106/135; aW)
Brilliantly located 500m east of the train station, a 10-minute stroll to the historic centre, Perpignan's standout hotel is this 17-room boutique gem with small but supremely comfortable rooms featuring iridescent fabrics, and themed around the sun, moon, day and night. Two have huge 20-sq-metre terraces, one includes an in-room Jacuzzi. Breakfast (€9.50) includes bacon and eggs and homemade jam.
5Eating
Perpignan's dining scene is a melange of French and Spanish cuisines, along with wider Mediterranean influences.
Rue Paratilla, known to locals as rue des Épices (Spice St), has an aromatic concentration of foodie shops (delis, greengrocers, charcuteries, fishmongers and, yes, spice shops).
Spaghetteri AldoITALIAN€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 61 11 47; www.spaghetteri-aldo-perpignan.fr; 1 rue des Variétés; pasta €9.50-13.50, mains €17.50-19.50; hnoon-2pm & 7-11.30pm Tue-Sat)
International rugby stars fuel up on the ultrafresh homemade pasta dishes (incorporating 15 pasta styles) at this authentic wood-beamed Italian restaurant. Favourites include langoustine ravioli, gnocchi Gorgonzola, salmon lasagne, and olive, basil and bresaola (aged, air-dried salted beef) pappardelle. Mains span anchovy-stuffed veal to juicy, grilled, sliced beef tagliata, but don't expect pizza, which it resolutely doesn't serve.
Big BuddyBURGERS€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 73 96 83; 63 av du Général Leclerc; burgers €12-16; hnoon-2pm Mon & Tue, noon-2pm & 8-10pm Wed-Sat)
Reservations are essential at this burger bar, which is the hottest ticket in town. Burgers such as Mont d'Or (beef and bacon with mushroom sauce), Triple Cheese (cheddar, Mimosette and Tomme de Brebis, with Jack Daniels BBQ sauce) and Chabry (grilled aubergine and courgette, goat's cheese, sundried tomato and honey) come with fries (twice-cooked in beef dripping) and salads.
oLe St-JeanMODERN FRENCH€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 51 22 25; www.lesaint-jean.com; 1 rue Cité Bartissol; tapas €7-14, 2-/3-course lunch menus €15/19, 3-course dinner menu €32, mains €21-32; hnoon-2pm & 7-10.30pm Mon-Sat mid-Jun–mid-Sep, noon-2pm Mon-Wed, noon-2pm & 7-10.30pm Thu-Sat mid-Sep–mid-Jun)
Atmospherically set in the shadow of its namesake cathedral, opening to a charming magnolia-shaded cobbled courtyard, Le St-Jean is Perpignan's top address for inventive French fare: red mullet with fennel cream; rabbit pâté and orange salad; walnut-crusted scallops with parsnip purée and leek pesto sauce; veal steak stuffed with sage and apple; and a meringue-encased raspberry dome with blackberry coulis.
Le Grain de FolieBISTRO€€
( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 51 00 50; 71 av du Général Leclerc; 2-/3-course menus lunch €16.50/20, dinner €30/40; hnoon-2pm & 7.30-9.30pm Mon-Sat, noon-2pm Sun; c)
On up-and-coming av du Général Leclerc, this is one of Perpignan’s best-value bistros, run with care by a husband-and-wife team. It’s classic in style and strong on southern French flavours: tuck into rib-eye fillet with girolle mushrooms or sea bass with roasted artichoke. The kids' menu includes local sausages and battered fish.
Les Frères MossésFRENCH€€
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 80 63 31; 14 rue de la Fusterie; 2-/3-course lunch menu €17/19, mains €16-25; hnoon-2pm & 8-10.30pm Tue-Sat)
Warm colours, tinkling jazz and walls covered in vintage signs give this cosy place the air of an old-time Parisian bistro. It’s a great bet for French favourites (confit de canard; steak-frites) and you can watch the chef at work in the semi-open kitchen.
6Drinking & Nightlife
Cafes and bars cluster on and around place de la République and on both banks of the canal. Av du Général Leclerc has an emerging drinking and nightlife scene.
La CafetièreCOFFEE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.lacafetiere66.com; 17 rue de l'Ange; h1.30-7pm Mon, 8am-7pm Tue-Sat)S
Freshly-ground-coffee aromas waft from this wonderful roastery, which sells beans to take away and brews fantastic espressos to drink at its counter or on the trio of cherry-red pavement tables. Loose-leaf teas are also a speciality, along with gourmet chocolates.
La FabrikBAR
( GOOGLE MAP ; 53 av du Général Leclerc; h11.30am-2am Mon-Fri, 5pm-2am Sat)
Local Roussillon wines, French and Spanish beers, rum cocktails and classic Spanish tapas are served inside this cavernous bar with gorgeous tiled floors and on its glass-screened, umbrella-shaded pavement terrace, which overflows with revellers on warm evenings.
8Information
Tourist office ( GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 66 30 30; www.perpignantourisme.com; place François Arago; h9am-7pm Mon-Sat, 10am-5pm Sun Jun-Sep, 9am-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-1pm Sun Oct-May) Just west of the historic centre atop a covered section of the canal.
8Getting There & Around
AIR
Perpignan’s airport (PGF; GOOGLE MAP ; %04 68 52 60 70; www.aeroport-perpignan.com; av Maurice Bellonte) is 5km northwest of the town centre. Destinations include London Stansted, Birmingham, Brussels (Ryanair); Southampton (Flybe); Dublin (Aer Lingus); Paris and Lille (Air France).
The Navette Aéroport bus 7 (Airport Shuttle; GOOGLE MAP ; one way €1) links the airport with place de Catalogne on the northwestern edge of the old town (25 minutes, every 30 minutes Monday to Saturday, two services Sunday).
BUS
Buses anywhere in the Pyrénées-Orientales département cost a flat-rate €1 (see www.cg66.fr/252-les-bus-departementaux.htm). Perpignan’s bus station ( GOOGLE MAP ; www.cg66.fr/252-les-bus-departementaux.htm; av du Général Leclerc) is on av du Général Leclerc.
ACôte Vermeille (hourly Monday to Saturday, one on Sunday) Bus 400/404 trundles to Collioure (50 minutes), Port-Vendres (65 minutes) and Banyuls-sur-Mer (80 minutes).
ATech Valley (hourly Monday to Saturday, four on Sunday) Buses 300/341/342 run regularly to Céret (50 minutes).
ATêt Valley (every two hours Monday to Saturday, two on Sunday) Regular buses to Prades (one hour) and Vernet-les-Bains (1½ hours); buses are numbered 200/210/220/260 depending on the route.
TRAIN
Frequent direct trains serve destinations in France and across the border in Spain.
ABanyuls-sur-Mer €7.70, 30 minutes
ABarcelona €37.10, 1½ hours
ACarcassonne €21.20, two hours
ACollioure €6.10, 20 minutes
AMontpellier €21.80, 1¾ hours
ANarbonne €15.50, one hour
AParis Gare de Lyon €105, 5½ hours
Céret
POP 7885
Tucked in the Pyrenean foothills just off the Tech Valley, the little town of Céret conceals an unexpected surprise – one of southern France’s best modern-art museums, with a collection of stellar canvases donated by some of the 20th century’s foremost names from cubism to neorealism.
Lively festivals also take place in the town in spring and summer.
1Sights & Activities
oMusée d’Art ModerneART MUSEUM
(www.musee-ceret.com; 8 bd Maréchal Joffre; adult/child €5.50/3.50, incl temporary exhibitions €8/6; h10am-7pm Jul-Sep, to 5.30pm Tue-Sun Oct-Jun)
Roussillon had its artistic heyday around the turn of the 20th century, when Fauvist and cubist artists flocked here, attracted by the searing colours and sun-drenched landscapes. This wonderful museum was created in 1950 by Pierre Brune and Frank Burty Haviland, who convinced friends including Picasso, Matisse, Chaïm Soutine and Georges Braque to donate works. The result is one of the finest collections of modern art outside Paris. Take your time – this place is a real treat.
Céret’s artistic connections stretch back to 1910, when Catalan sculptor Manolo Hugué, painter Frank Burty Haviland and composer Déodat de Séverac settled here. They were followed in 1911 by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, along with other significant figures from the cubist and Fauvist movements, mostly escaping the spiralling rents and stifling atmosphere of the Montmartre art scene.
All the big names passed through Céret, sometimes staying for a short while, sometimes for extended periods. Reading like a who’s who of modern art, the list includes André Masson, Max Jacob, Juan Gris, Raoul Dufy, Jean Cocteau, Chaïm Soutine, Amedeo Modigliani, Marc Chagall, Salvador Dalí and Joan Miró among them.
After the museum’s formation in 1950, many of these artists (or their estates) chose to donate their works for free in recognition of Céret’s importance to their artistic development (Picasso alone donated 57 pieces, although only one painting, a still life of a dead crane and a jug).
Standout works include a moving Crucifixion (1925) by Marc Chagall, Woman, Bird, Stars by Joan Miró, and a famous cubist view of Céret by Chaïm Soutine, painted in 1919 – but there are many more to discover.
AquacanyonADVENTURE SPORTS
(%07 62 92 34 99; www.aquacanyon.fr; 21 rue Aristide Maillol; canyoning/via ferrata/rafting/rock climbing from €35/47/30/45; h9am-10pm)
Canyoning and via ferrata trips in the Pyrenees are organised year-round by Aquacanyon; in summer it also offers white-water rafting, while in the cooler winter months you can go rock climbing.
4Sleeping & Eating
There are several places to sleep in and around the town, but Céret's proximity to Perpignan, 30km to the northeast, means it's easy to visit as a day trip.
oLe Relais des ChartreusesB&B€€
(%04 68 83 15 88; www.relais-des-chartreuses.fr; 106 av d’en Carbonner, Le Boulou; s €70-80, d €80-187, ste €210-273; paWs)
A glorious getaway 12.5km east of Céret via the D618, Le Relais des Chartreuses has 15 glossy rooms inside a Catalan-style house dating from the 17th century. Clutter has been stripped out in favour of a few key antiques, and there's a designer pool and a table d’hôte restaurant. Half-board costs €45 per person; breakfast is €15.
Al CatalāCATALAN€€
(%04 68 87 07 91; www.restaurantalcatalaceret66.com; 15 av Georges Clemenceau; menus €15-36, mains €14-21; hnoon-2pm & 7.30-9.30pm Tue-Sat, noon-2pm Sun)
Classic Catalan dishes – monkfish with chorizo, duck stew, Pyrenees veal steak with courgette and fiery peppers – are artistically presented and served in a colourful red and hot-pink dining room, but they're best enjoyed in the bamboo-screened, umbrella-shaded courtyard garden.
8Information
Tourist office (%04 68 87 00 53; www.ot-ceret.fr; 1 av Georges Clemenceau; h9am-12.30pm & 2-5pm Mon-Sat) Can suggest hiking itineraries in the region.
8Getting There & Away
Buses 340, 341 and 342 run to/from Perpignan (€1, 35 minutes, up to 12 daily Monday to Saturday, up to three Sunday).
There’s a large car park next to the Musée d’Art Moderne.


Villefranche-de-Conflent
POP 223
The Unesco-listed town of Villefranche-de-Conflent sits in a breathtaking spot, hemmed in by tall cliffs, at the strategic confluence of the valleys of the Têt and Cady Rivers. Built by Vauban, its fort dominates the valley and you can walk along the walled town's ramparts. From Villefranche, the famous mountain railway Le Train Jaune runs through the Pyrenees almost to the Spanish border.
1Sights & Activities
RampartsHISTORIC SITE
(adult/child €4.50/free; h10am-8pm Jun-Aug, shorter hours rest of year)
It’s still possible to walk along much of Villefranche’s ramparts. Built in stages between the 11th and 19th centuries, they have survived remarkably intact. Plunging valley views extend through arrow slits and machicolations.
Château-Fort LiberiaFORT
(www.fort-liberia.com; adult/child €7/3.80; h9am-8pm Jul & Aug, 10am-7pm Jun & Sep, 10am-6pm Apr & May, 10am-5pm Oct-Mar)
Villefranche’s mighty fort dominates the skyline above town. Built by Vauban in 1681, it was heavily refortified by Napoléon III between 1850 and 1856. You can wander around its corner turrets and battlements, as well as the defensive keep and a former prison. A shuttle bus from town (adult/child return €10/5.10) saves you a steep climb up 734 steps.
Le Train JauneRAIL
(%04 68 96 63 62; www.tersncf.com; adult/child one way €10/5)
Nicknamed Le Canari (the Canary), this bright-yellow mountain railway trundles from Villefranche-de-Conflent (427m) through spectacular Pyrenean scenery to Latour de Carol (1231m). One of France’s most famous train trips, attracting 400,000 passengers annually, it doesn't take bookings, so arrive a good hour before departure. It makes scheduled stops at eight of its 22 stations; you can alight at the others on request.
At Latour de Carol you can return to Villefranche or change for Toulouse or Barcelona.
8Getting There & Away
Bus 240 links Villefranche-de-Conflent with Perpignan (€1, 1¼ hours, five daily Monday to Saturday, no services Sunday). Buses 240 and 241 serve Vernet-les-Bains (€1, 15 minutes, seven daily Monday to Saturday, no services Sunday).
Mountain railway Le Train Jaune travels to Latour de Carol, where you can change trains for Toulouse or Barcelona.



Côte Vermeille
Named for its red rock, the Côte Vermeille (Vermilion Coast) runs south from Collioure to Cerbère on the Spanish border, where the Pyrenees foothills dip to the sea. Against a backdrop of vineyards and pinched between the Mediterranean and the mountains, it’s riddled with small, rocky bays and little ports.
The main town here is Collioure. Three kilometres to its south, Port-Vendres, Roussillon’s only natural harbour and deep-water port, has been exploited ever since Greek mariners roamed the rocky coastline. Until the independence of France’s North African territories in the 1960s, it was an important port linking them with the mainland. It’s still a significant cargo and fishing harbour, however, with everything from small coastal chuggers to giant deep-sea vessels bristling with radar. There’s also a large leisure marina, and lots of pleasant walks around the coastline nearby.
8Getting There & Away
Buses and trains run regularly along the coast from Perpignan. If you’re driving, you can follow the lovely coastal roads all the way to Banyuls-sur-Mer.
Collioure
POP 3096
Collioure, where boats bob against a backdrop of houses washed in soft pastel colours, is the smallest and most picturesque of the Côte Vermeille resorts. Once Perpignan’s port, it found fame in the early 20th century when it inspired the Fauvist artists Henri Matisse and André Derain and later both Picasso and Braque.
Today the town has more than 30 galleries and workshops, including many on rue de la Fraternité. Collioure is also famed for its wine and its prized Collioure anchovies. Like most beaches along the Côte Vermeille, Collioure’s main town beach is shingly, but pleasant enough for a paddle.
1Sights
Château RoyalCHATEAU
(%04 68 82 06 43; www.cg66.fr; Port Plaisance; adult/child €4/2; h10am-7pm Jul & Aug, 9am-5pm Sep-Jun)
Collioure’s seaside castle was mostly built between 1276 and 1344 by the counts of Roussillon and the kings of Aragon, and was later occupied by the Mallorcan court, although the outer wall was the work of Vauban in the 17th century. Interior furnishings are minimal, but the hybrid Spanish-French architectural styles are striking and the coastal views lovely. Markets, concerts and theatre performances take place in the grounds throughout the year.
Musée d’Art ModerneART MUSEUM
(4 rte de Port-Vendres; adult/child €3/free; h10am-noon & 2-6pm Jun-Sep, 10am-noon & 2-6pm Wed-Mon Oct-May)
Boat sketches by Matisse and Edouard Pignon along with coastal canvases by Henri Martin and Henri Marre are among the highlights of this small but worthwhile museum. It has a good collection of mainly 20th-century canvases and holds regular exhibitions by local artists.
Moulin de la CortinaLANDMARK
(Parc Pams)
The most scenic way to reach this 14th-century windmill is a 950m walk through olive and almond groves from Fort St-Elme along the Cami del Port de Sant Telm (about 20 minutes). Alternatively, it's a steep 150m walk from the Musée d'Art Moderne. Mediterranean views of boats, rocky coast and brilliant blue sea extend from the mill's raised base.
Fort St-ElmeFORTRESS
(www.fortsaintelme.fr; rte Stratégique; adult/child €6/free; h10.30am-7pm Apr-Sep, to 5pm mid-Feb–Mar & Oct-early Nov)
Built in 1552 by Spanish king Charles V between Collioure and Port-Vendre, this hilltop fort was designed as a key piece of the coastal defence system. It’s now mainly used as an exhibition centre.
2Activities
Le Chemin de FauvismeWALKING
During the early 20th century, Collioure’s vibrant coastal hues and piercing light attracted a group of artists known as the Fauves (the Wild Animals), whose focus was pure colour. The tourist office has a free map of the Chemin de Fauvisme, a walking trail taking in 19 locations that featured in works by Henri Matisse and his younger colleague André Derain.
Cellier des DominicainsWINE TASTING
(%04 68 82 05 63; www.cellierdominicain.com; place Orphila; cellar tours €2; h9am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Sat Apr-Sep)
This former monk’s cellar now showcases vintages from more than 150 local vignerons (winegrowers). Cellar tours lasting 40 minutes, followed by a tasting, take place at 4pm Thursday June to September in French and English.
4Sleeping
Hôtel Princes des CatalognesHOTEL€
(%04 68 98 30 00; www.hotel-princescatalogne.com; rue des Palmiers; d €83-93, f €165-185; aW)
While it doesn’t have much of a sea view, this modern hotel makes up for it by offering some of the most reasonable rates in Collioure, even in high summer. The decor is clean and fresh, if a touch bland, but with only 15 rooms it doesn’t feel crowded even when full. Family rooms sleep up to four people.
Villa MirandaB&B€€
(%04 68 98 03 79; www.villamiranda.fr; 15 rte du place de les Forques; d €105-115; pW)
Simple but sweet, this B&B has five rooms decked out in cheery stripes, with blonde-wood floors and bright bathrooms; Xalac, Marinade and Migjorn have their own private sea-view patios, and there’s a shared panoramic terrace on the 1st floor.
Casa PairalHOTEL€€
(%04 68 82 05 81; www.hotel-casa-pairal.com; rue des Palmiers; d €127-207, ste €307; paiWs)
Set around a secluded jasmine- and rose-perfumed garden sheltering a heated swimming pool and a fountain, this 18th-century house has 27 heritage-style rooms. Moving up the price scale buys extra space and balconies overlooking the garden, vineyards and mountains beyond. Breakfast is served beneath a century-old magnolia tree. It's conveniently situated in the town centre, a 250m stroll from the beach.
5Eating
Casa LeonBISTRO€€
(%04 68 82 10 74; 2 rue Rière; menus €28-36, mains €16.50-25; hnoon-2pm & 7-10.30pm)
Lost in the tangled old quarter, this simple Catalan bistro relies on the quality of its ingredients: grilled half-lobster and langoustines, cod with mussels and oysters, or king scallops in creamy sauces, along with Collioure’s celebrated anchovies.
La 5ème PéchéFUSION€€
(%04 68 98 09 76; www.le-cinquieme-peche.com; 16 rue Fraternité; 2-/3-course lunch menus €19/25, 3-course/tasting dinner menus €39/62; h12.15-1.45pm & 7.30-9pm Wed-Sat, 12.15-1.45pm Sun, 7.30-9pm Mon & Tue)
Japan meets France at this creative fusion restaurant. Chef Masashi Iijima utilises locally caught seafood in artistic dishes such as scallop sashimi with seaweed, langoustines in mussel broth, and swordfish with bamboo-shoot mousse. The dining room is small and very popular with locals and visitors alike – book ahead.
Le NeptuneGASTRONOMY€€€
(%04 68 82 02 27; www.leneptune-collioure.com; 9 rte de Port-Vendres; 3-course lunch menu €29, 3-/4-/5-course dinner menus €39/59/79; hnoon-2pm & 7-10pm Jul-Sep, noon-2pm & 7-10pm Tue-Sun Apr-Jun & Oct, noon-2pm & 7-9.30pm Thu-Sun Nov-Mar; v)
It’s a toss-up whether the setting or the food steals the show here. Overlooking Collioure’s brilliant blue bay and red rooftops, the panoramic seaside terrace (covered and heated in winter) is an absolute stunner, while local ingredients span just-landed turbot to just-cooked lobster. The style is formal, so you'll need to dress up.
A four-course vegetarian menu is available for €39.
8Information
Tourist office (%04 68 82 15 47; www.collioure.com; place du 18 juin; h9.15am-6.45pm Jul-Sep, 9.15am-6.45pm Mon-Sat, 10am-5.30pm Sun Apr-Jun & Oct) On the northern side of town next to quai de l'Amirauté.
Banyuls-sur-Mer
POP 4749
Just 14km north of the Spanish border, Banyuls is a small coastal town that began life as a fishing port but is now best known for its wines (Banyuls, Banyuls Grand Cru and Collioure). Grapes grow on the slopes around town on steep, rocky terraces divided by drystone walls, which help retain water and prevent soil erosion.
It’s a lovely spot, with three shingly but superb beaches (Centrale, Les Elmes and Centre Hélio Marin) with translucent turquoise waters, and an important marine reserve, the Réserve Naturelle Cerbère-Banyuls, 6km southeast of town, where you can snorkel and scuba dive. Banyuls is also a convenient stop-off if you’re heading over the border into Spain.
1Sights & Activities
BiodiversariumAQUARIUM, GARDENS
(%04 68 88 73 39; www.biodiversarium.fr; av du Fontaulé; adult/child aquarium €5/2.50, joint ticket with Jardin Méditerranéen €7.50/4; h10am-12.30pm & 2-6pm)
At the southern end of Banyuls’ seafront promenade is France's oldest aquarium. Built in 1885 as the oceanographic research station of Paris’ Université Pierre et Marie Curie, the Laboratoire Arago houses an intriguing collection of Mediterranean marine life, from seahorses to sea anemones. Combination tickets are available with the Jardin Méditerranéen du Mas de la Serre (%04 68 88 73 39; www.biodiversarium.fr; rte des Crêtes; adult/child garden only €5/2.50, joint ticket with Biodiversarium €7.50/4; h10am-12.30pm & 2-6pm Jul & Aug, 2-6pm Wed-Sun Apr-Jun & Sep, closed Oct-Mar).
Paulilles Director’s HouseMUSEUM
(www.ledepartement66.fr; D914; h9am-noon & 2-5pm Apr-Oct, 9am-noon & 2-5pm Wed-Mon Nov-Mar)F
Part industrial relic, part nature walk, this 35-hectare coastal site 3.2km north of Banyuls-sur-Mer is remote, as you'd expect of a one-time dynamite factory. It was set up by Nobel Prize founder Alfred Nobel in 1870 and subsequently abandoned in 1984.
Haunting photos inside the former director’s house depict the hard lives and close community of Catalan workers, whose explosives helped to blast the Panama Canal, Trans-Siberian Railway and Mont Blanc Tunnel.
Aquableu PlongéeDIVING, SNORKELLING
(%04 68 88 17 35; www.aquableu-plongee.com; 5 quai Georges Petit; diving from €26, gear rental per dive from €5, snorkelling trips from €20; hApr-early Nov)
The Réserve Naturelle Cerbère-Banyuls is a favourite with underwater photographers for its crabs, lobsters, starfish, groupers, anemones, ballan wrasse, damselfish, octopi, sea bream, wolf fish, eels, orange gorgonians and jellyfish. Immerse yourself in its crystalline waters with Aquableu Plongée, which offers diving and snorkelling as well as multiday live-aboard trips and PADI courses for beginners through to experienced divers.
Cellier des TempliersWINE
(%04 68 98 36 92; www.terresdestempliers.fr; rte du Mas Reig; h10am-7.30pm late Mar-early Nov)
The best place to try Banyuls wines is this vineyard 1.5km west of the seafront via the D86. Free 30-minute guided tours take in the vineyards and the century-old oak vats. Tours in English depart at 2.30pm, 4pm and 5.30pm.
DON'T MISS
LUNCH WITH SEA VIEW

La LittorineMEDITERRANEAN€€€
(%04 68 88 03 12; www.restaurant-la-littorine.fr; Plage des Elmes; 2-/3-course lunch menus €24/32, mains €28-60; hnoon-1.45pm & 7-8.45pm)
Bang on the beach, with a sun-drenched glass-enclosed terrace, the pick of Banyuls' restaurants stocks over 400 Languedoc-Roussillon wines to complement flavour-packed Mediterranean dishes: Collioure anchovies marinated in olive oil, scallops with beetroot carpaccio and walnut vinaigrette, octopus with Espelette peppers, tuna with foie-gras sauce and heirloom vegetables, and Roussillon apricot tart with mascarpone sorbet.
8Information
Tourist office (%04 68 88 31 58; wwwbanyuls-sur-mer.com; 4 av de la République; h9am-7pm Jul & Aug, 9am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Sat Sep-Jun) Midway along the beachfront.







=======================================================
=======================================================
=======================================================



Find Free Waking Tour
Review TA - things to do